



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 T. Lemon
Internet-Draft                                                Apple Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                                  J. Hui
Expires: 3 March 2027                                         Google LLC
                                                                 E. Dijk
                                                       IoTconsultancy.nl
                                                          30 August 2026


   Automatically Connecting Stub Networks to Unmanaged Infrastructure
                       draft-ietf-snac-simple-12

Abstract

   This document specifies a set of practices for using IPv6 networking
   to automatically connect stub networks to adjacent infrastructure
   networks, even if they do not otherwise use IPv6.  This is applicable
   in cases such as constrained (Internet of Things) networks where
   there is a need to provide functional parity of service discovery and
   reachability between devices on the stub network and devices on an
   adjacent infrastructure link (for example, a home network).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.1.  Interoperability Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     1.2.  Usability Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     1.3.  Sample SNAC Routers Deployment in a Home Network  . . . .   7
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.1.  Requirements language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.2.  Glossary of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4.  Common requirements for adjacent infrastructure and stub
           networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.1.  Support for IPv6 Neighbor Discovery . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     4.2.  Supported network topologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     4.3.  Handling SNAC router restarts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       4.3.1.  Scenario 1: AIL on-link prefix changes after
               restart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       4.3.2.  Scenario 2: AIL on-link prefix remains the same after
               restart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
       4.3.3.  Scenario 3: Off-Stub-Network Routable prefix change
               after restart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   5.  SNAC router functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     5.1.  Managing addressability on an adjacent infrastructure
           link  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       5.1.1.  Suitable On-Link Prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       5.1.2.  State Machine for maintaining a suitable on-link prefix
               on an adjacent infrastructure link  . . . . . . . . .  17
     5.2.  Managing addressability on the stub network . . . . . . .  22
       5.2.1.  Generating a per-SNAC-router ULA Site Prefix  . . . .  23
       5.2.2.  Using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation to acquire a prefix to
               provide addressability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
     5.3.  Managing reachability on the adjacent infrastructure
           link  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  27
     5.4.  Managing reachability on the stub network . . . . . . . .  27
     5.5.  Providing discoverability between stub network links and
           infrastructure network links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
       5.5.1.  Discoverability by hosts on adjacent infrastructure
               links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
       5.5.2.  Providing discoverability of adjacent infrastructure
               hosts on the stub network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
       5.5.3.  DNS-over-TLS security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
   6.  Providing reachability to IPv4-only services to hosts on the
           stub network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


     6.1.  NAT64 provided by infrastructure  . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
     6.2.  NAT64 provided by SNAC router(s)  . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
   7.  Services Provided by a SNAC router  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
   9.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
     9.1.  Deployment and initial setup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
     9.2.  Impact on the infrastructure network and AIL  . . . . . .  39
     9.3.  Operation when the adjacent infrastructure link fails . .  40
     9.4.  Operation when the adjacent infrastructure link interface
           cannot be used  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
     9.5.  Operation when a SNAC router fails or is removed  . . . .  41
     9.6.  Diagnostic information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
     9.7.  Troubleshooting failure situations  . . . . . . . . . . .  42
   10. Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
     10.1.  OpenThread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  44
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46
   12. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  47
   13. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  50
   Appendix A.  Analysis of deployment scenarios in which a SNAC
           router could cause problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
     A.1.  Unmanaged home network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  52
     A.2.  Use on an unmanaged (non-home) IPv6 network . . . . . . .  53
     A.3.  Use on a managed network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
       A.3.1.  Managed networks where DHCPv6 is required but RA-Guard
               is not present  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
       A.3.2.  Use on a managed network without IPv6 . . . . . . . .  55
   Appendix B.  Router Advertisements on the Infrastructure
           Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55
   Appendix C.  Router Advertisements on the stub network  . . . . .  57
   Appendix D.  Handling failure and change situations on a stub
           network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  58
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  60

1.  Introduction

   This document specifies a set of practices for automatically
   connecting IPv6 stub networks to adjacent infrastructure networks.
   The connection is enabled through a Stub Network Auto-Configuring
   router, or SNAC router.

   What makes stub networks a distinct type of network is simply that a
   stub network never provides transit between networks to which it is
   connected.  The term "stub" refers to the way the network is seen by
   the link to which it is connected: there is reachability through a
   stub router to nodes on the stub network from the adjacent
   infrastructure link, but there is no reachability through the stub
   network to any link beyond that one.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   Eliminating transit routing is not intended to be seen as a virtue in
   itself, but rather as a simplifying assumption that makes it possible
   to solve a subset of the general problem of automating multi-link
   networks.  Stub networks may be globally reachable, or may be only
   locally reachable.  A host on a locally reachable stub network can
   only interoperate with hosts on the network link(s) to which it is
   connected.  A host on a globally reachable stub network should be
   able to interoperate with hosts on other network links in the same
   infrastructure network as well as hosts on the global Internet.

   There are several use cases for stub networks.  Motivating factors in
   these use cases include:

   *  Incompatible speed: for example, an IEEE 802.15.4 [IEEE802.15.4]
      network could not be easily bridged to a Wi-Fi network because the
      data rates are so dissimilar.  So either it must be bridged in a
      very complicated and careful way to avoid overwhelming the
      802.15.4 network with irrelevant traffic, or the 802.15.4 network
      needs to be a separate subnet.

   *  Incompatible media: for example, a constrained 802.15.4 network
      connected as a stub network to a Wi-Fi or Ethernet infrastructure
      network.  In this situation bridging between the two media is not
      possible because the layer-two framing and addressing is
      incompatible.  While 802.15.4 may use both 16-bit and 64-bit MAC
      addresses, the infrastructure network uses 48-bit MAC addresses.

   *  Inconsistent availability of individual routers: in the case of an
      802.15.4 network, it is quite possible that the devices used to
      link the infrastructure network to the stub network will not be
      conceived of by the end user as routers.  Consequently, one cannot
      assume that these devices will be on all the time.  A solution for
      this use case will require some sort of commissioning process for
      stub routers, and can't assume that any particular stub router
      will always be available; rather, any stub router that is
      available must be able to adapt to current network conditions to
      provide reachability.

   *  Incompatible ND mechanisms: some stub networks might not use IPv6
      Neighbor Discovery (ND) to populate an IPv6 neighbor cache, but
      instead a different mechanism.  If the infrastructure network (as
      is typical) does use ND, then bridging the two networks together
      would require some way of translating between ND and the alternate
      mechanism used on the stub network, and hence complicates rather
      than simplifies the problem of connecting the two networks.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   *  Incompatible framing: if the stub network is a 6LoWPAN [RFC4944]
      network, packets on the stub network are expected to use 6LoWPAN
      header compression [RFC6282].  Making this work through a bridge
      would be very difficult.

   *  Convenience: in some use cases, end users need to connect devices
      to each other in a "plug and play" fashion in order to extend
      networks without requiring any network administration actions.

   *  Transitory connectivity: a mobile device acting as a stub router
      for a set of co-located devices may need to connect to an
      infrastructure network and gain access to services for itself and
      for the co-located devices.  In such use cases, the stub network
      is temporary and contains exactly one stub router.

   The goal of this document is to specify the minimal set of changes or
   behaviors required to use existing IETF specifications to support the
   stub network use cases.  The result is the specification of the SNAC
   router, intended to be deployable on existing IPv4/IPv6
   infrastructure networks without requiring changes to those networks.

   It may be noted that just as one can plug several CE router devices
   together in series using Ethernet cabling to form multi-layer NATs,
   the owner of a stub router device could attach it to a stub network
   as if that network were its infrastructure network, if the physical
   network connection (layer 1) and layer 2 are fully compatible.
   However, for the SNAC router as specified in this document chaining
   of routers in series is unlikely to be feasible, because the
   respective infrastructure and stub networking technologies in a SNAC
   router almost always differ.  For example, a SNAC router may provide
   an IoT wireless stub network to which an Ethernet plug or Wi-Fi
   client cannot be connected.  Therefore, this document does not
   attempt to solve the problems that chaining of SNAC routers in series
   would create.

1.1.  Interoperability Goals

   The specific goal of this specification is for hosts on the stub
   network to be able to interoperate with hosts on the adjacent
   infrastructure link.  What is meant by "interoperate" is that a host
   on a stub network:

   *  is discoverable by hosts attached to the adjacent infrastructure
      link

   *  is able to discover hosts attached to the adjacent infrastructure
      link




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   *  is able to discover hosts on the Internet

   *  is able to acquire an IPv6 address that can be used to communicate
      with hosts attached to the adjacent infrastructure link

   *  has reachability to the hosts attached to the adjacent
      infrastructure link

   *  is reachable by hosts on the adjacent infrastructure link

   *  is able to reach hosts on the Internet

   Discoverability here means "discoverable using DNS, or DNS Service
   Discovery".  DNS Service Discovery includes multicast DNS (mDNS)
   [RFC6762].  As an example, when one host connected to a specific Wi-
   Fi network wishes to discover services on hosts connected to that
   same Wi-Fi network, it can do so using mDNS.  Similarly, when a host
   on some other network wishes to discover the same service, it must
   use DNS-based Service Discovery [RFC6763].  In both cases,
   "discoverable using DNS" means that the host has one or more entries
   in the DNS that serve to make it discoverable.

   Discoverability is lumped in with reachability and addressability,
   both of which are essentially Layer 3 issues.  The reason for this is
   that it does no good to automatically set up connectivity between
   stub network hosts and infrastructure hosts if the infrastructure
   hosts have no means to learn about the availability of services
   provided by stub network hosts.  For stub network hosts that only
   consume Internet services this will not be an issue, but for stub
   networks that provide services, such as IoT devices on stub networks
   with incompatible media, discoverability is necessary in order for
   stub network connectivity to be useful.

   Ability to acquire an IP address that can be used to communicate
   means that the IP address a host on the stub network acquires can be
   used to communicate with it by hosts not on the stub network.

   Reachability to hosts on the adjacent infrastructure link means that
   when a host (A) on the stub network has a datagram destined for the
   IP address of a host (B) on the adjacent infrastructure link, host
   (A) knows of a next-hop router to which it can send the datagram, so
   that it will ultimately reach host (B) on the infrastructure network.









Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   Reachability from hosts on the adjacent infrastructure link means
   that when host (A) on the adjacent infrastructure link has a datagram
   destined for the IP address of a host (B) on the stub network, a
   next-hop router is known by host (A) such that, when the datagram is
   sent to that router, it will ultimately reach host (B) on the stub
   network.

   To achieve the reachability goal described above, this document
   assumes hosts attempting to reach destinations on the stub network
   maintain a routing table -- Type C hosts as defined in Section 3.1 of
   [RFC4191].  Type A and Type B hosts are out-of-scope for this
   document.

1.2.  Usability Goals

   In addition to the interoperability goals described above, the
   additional goal for stub networks is that these be able to be
   connected automatically, with no user intervention.  The experience
   of connecting a stub network to an infrastructure network should be
   as straightforward as connecting a new host to the same
   infrastructure network.

   SNAC routers can be attached to any network.  However, there are
   network configurations where a SNAC router will not work.  An
   analysis of networks where SNAC routers could be attached is provided
   in Appendix A.

1.3.  Sample SNAC Routers Deployment in a Home Network

   A stub network is attached via one or more SNAC routers to an
   infrastructure network, on which one or more infrastructure routers
   might be present.  An infrastructure router in the scope of this
   specification is an IPv4, IPv6 or dual-stack (IPv6/IPv4) router that
   provides various services in the infrastructure network.  It can be a
   CE router, home gateway or Wi-Fi router.  If no infrastructure router
   is present, the infrastructure network consists of a single link
   only.

   A SNAC router will connect as any other host in the infrastructure
   network, while additionally providing addressability, discoverability
   and reachability functions for hosts in the stub network.  See
   Section 7 for an overview of the specific services that a SNAC router
   implements to provide addressability, discoverability and
   reachability.







Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   This document describes mechanisms for connecting IPv6 hosts in stub
   networks to the infrastructure network using SNAC routers as shown in
   Figure 1.  Although the use case depicted there is specific to home
   networks, the mechanisms apply for any type of infrastructure network
   and stub network attachment scenarios.

   A SNAC router looks for a suitable IPv6 on-link prefix on the
   adjacent infrastructure link (AIL) to which it is connected.  This
   prefix may be already provided by the infrastructure router, or when
   no infrastructure IPv6 service is present, by another SNAC router
   connected to the same AIL.  If no suitable IPv6 on-link prefix is
   advertised on the AIL, the SNAC router will provide one itself by
   including a Prefix Information Option (PIO) in the Router
   Advertisement (RA) messages it transmits on the AIL.

                             (Internet)
                                 |
                    +------------+------------+
                    |  home Wi-Fi or CE       |
                    |  Infrastructure Router  |
                    +------------+------------+
                                 |
      infrastructure hosts     .-~-.
        +-----+              _(     )__
        |     |--+          (__________)
        +-----+  +------------->|
          '+-----+              |  (AIL - Adjacent Infrastructure Link)
               +----------------------------------+
               | (multiple SNAC Routers)          | (single SNAC Router)
         +-----+-------+                    +-----+-------+
         | SNAC Router |--+                 | SNAC Router |
         +-------------+  |                 +----+--------+
           '+----+--------+                      |
                 |                               |
        +--------+-----------+             +-----+--------------+
        |    Stub Network    |             |    Stub Network    |
        +--------------------+             +--------------------+

      Figure 1: SNAC Router connecting Stub Networks to Infrastructure

2.  Conventions and Terminology










Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


2.1.  Requirements language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.2.  Glossary of Terms

   This section contains a glossary of terms used in this document.

   Advertising Interface:  As defined in Section 6.2.2 of [RFC4861].

   Node:  A device that implements IPv6.

   Router:  A node that forwards IPv6 packets not explicitly addressed
      to itself.  (See Note in Section 2 of [RFC8200].)

   Host:  A node that is acting in a host [RFC8200] role for the
      purposes of the discussion: as an endpoint of a communication and
      not as a router of IP packets.  In this document, the term 'host'
      does not exclude nodes that also act as routers on the same
      network interface.  Although [RFC8200] makes a clear distinction
      between hosts and routers, in this document specifically the host
      role exercised by a node to perform a specific function or task is
      emphasized and not the complete set of functions which the node
      may provide.  For example, a SNAC router performs various
      functions in a host role while it is also a router.  (Also, see
      the Note in Section 2 of [RFC8200].)

   IPv4-only Host:  A device that implements IPv4, but not IPv6; acting
      as an endpoint of IPv4 communication.

   Addressability:  The ability to associate each node on a link with
      its own IPv6 address.

   Reachability:  Given an IPv6 destination address that is not on-link
      for any link to which a node is attached, the information required
      that allows the node to send packets to a router that can forward
      those packets towards a link where the destination address is on-
      link.

   Adjacent Infrastructure Link (AIL):  any link to which a stub router
      is directly attached, that is part of an infrastructure network
      and is not the stub network.

   Customer Edge (CE) Router:  As defined in



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      [I-D.ietf-v6ops-rfc7084bis].  A CE router is an infrastructure
      router that is intended to connect a single uplink network to a
      Local-Area Network.  A CE router may be provided by an ISP and
      only capable of connecting directly to the ISP's means of service
      delivery, e.g. Cable or DSL, or it may have an Ethernet port on
      the WAN side and one or more Ethernet ports, plus Wi-Fi, on the
      LAN side.

   Infrastructure network:  the network infrastructure to which a stub
      router connects.  This network can be a single link, or a network
      of links.  The network (in case of a network of links) is formed
      by one or more infrastructure routers.  In a home network, this is
      typically a CE router, which may also provide some services, such
      as a DNS resolver, a DHCPv4 server, and a DHCPv6 prefix delegation
      (DHCPv6-PD, see Section 6.3 of [RFC9915]) server, for example.

   Infrastructure router:  An IP router that is part of an
      infrastructure network.  For example, a CE router.

   Off-Stub-Network-Routable (OSNR) Prefix:  an IPv6 prefix advertised
      on the stub network that can be used for communication with hosts
      not on the stub network.

   DNS Resolver / Resolver:  A resolver as defined in Section 6 of
      [RFC9499].  "DNS resolver" is used as a synonym for "resolver" to
      clearly point out the DNS context of this term.

   Stub Network:  A network link that is connected by one or more stub
      routers to an AIL in an infrastructure network, but is not used
      for transit between that link and any other link.  Section 2.1 of
      [RFC2328] describes the distinction between stub networks and
      transit networks from a topological perspective: a stub network is
      simply any network that does not provide transit within a routing
      fabric.  There is reachability through a stub network router to
      hosts on the stub network, but there is no reachability through
      the stub network to any link beyond the stub network link.

   Stub Router:  A router that provides connectivity between a stub
      network and an infrastructure network.  A stub router may also
      provide connectivity between other networks: the term "stub
      router" refers specifically to its role in providing connectivity
      to a stub network.  For example, a CE router may provide
      connectivity between a provider network (WAN) and a network (LAN),
      while at the same time providing connectivity between the LAN and
      a stub network.  What distinguishes the LAN from the stub network
      in this case is that the LAN is potentially a candidate to act as
      a transit network to reach other routers, whereas the stub network
      is not.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   SNAC Router:  A Stub Network Auto-Configuring (SNAC) Router.  This is
      a stub router that implements the autoconfiguration methods
      defined by this specification.  By definition, a CE router can't
      be a SNAC router, because it is an infrastructure router, and
      therefore has operational control over its stub networks.

   ULA Site Prefix:  A Unique Local Address /48 prefix [RFC4193]
      randomly generated by each SNAC router for use in allocating ULA
      link prefixes to the stub network and the adjacent infrastructure
      link, and for use in allocating a NAT64 prefix.

   ULA Link Prefix:  A Unique Local Address /64 prefix allocated from
      the ULA site prefix.  SNAC routers can use ULA link prefixes to
      provide addressability on the stub network and/or adjacent
      infrastructure link as needed.

   NAT64 Prefix:  Any prefix used to provide NAT64 service, used as the
      'prefix' element of the IPv4-embedded IPv6 address format of
      [RFC6052].  A NAT64 prefix generated by a SNAC router is always a
      Unique Local Address /96 prefix allocated from its ULA site
      prefix.

3.  Constants

   This section describes the meaning of and gives default values for
   various constants used in this document.

   STALE_RA_TIME (default: 10 minutes):  The amount of time that can
      pass after the last time a Router Advertisement (RA) message from
      a particular IPv6 router has been received before it is assumed
      the router is no longer present.  This is a stopgap in case the
      router is reachable but has silently stopped sending RA messages;
      this situation is unlikely, but if it does happen, new hosts
      joining the infrastructure network will not be able to reach hosts
      on the stub network until the SNAC router decides that the router
      that previously advertised the suitable on-link prefix on the AIL
      is stale.

   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME (default: 30 minutes):  The valid and
      preferred lifetime the SNAC router will advertise for an on-link
      prefix on the AIL.  This should be long enough that a host is
      actually willing to use it for configuring an IPv6 address, and
      obviously should also be long enough that a missed RA will not
      cause the host to stop using it.

   MinRtrAdvInterval (default: 154 seconds):  The minimum interval for





Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      periodic unsolicited RA message sending (as defined in
      Section 6.2.1 of [RFC4861]) for a SNAC router.  This determines
      together with MaxRtrAdvInterval how often the SNAC router will
      transmit these multicast RA messages.  This should be frequent
      enough that a missed Router Solicitation (RS) message (e.g. due to
      congestion on a Wi-Fi link) will not result in an extremely long
      outage (assuming the congestion passes before the RA is sent, of
      course).  The Min/Max default values lead to an unsolicited RA
      multicast every 3 minutes ( (154+206)/2 = 180 ), on average.

   MaxRtrAdvInterval (default: 206 seconds):  The maximum interval for
      periodic unsolicited RA message sending (as defined in
      Section 6.2.1 of [RFC4861]) for a SNAC router.

   MIN_PD_PREFIX_LIFETIME (default: 30 minutes):  The minimum preferred
      lifetime that a prefix, delegated with DHCPv6-PD, must have in
      order to be suitable as a OSNR prefix for the stub network.  The
      minimum lifetime is chosen to be long enough that a reboot of the
      DHCPv6 server or the SNAC router will not prevent the successful
      renewal of the prefix.

   MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME (default: 60 seconds):  The maximum
      ReachableTime value that a router can have in the neighbor cache
      before any suitable prefixes it has advertised are no longer
      considered suitable.

   STUB_NETWORK_ROUTE_LIFETIME (default: 30 minutes):  The Route
      Lifetime that will be specified in Route Information Options
      (RIOs) sent by the SNAC router to advertise the route to its stub
      network on the AIL.  Also, the maximum Route Lifetime that will be
      specified in Route Information Options sent by the SNAC router to
      its stub network to advertise the route to the AIL.

   MIN_SUITABLE_PREFIX_PREFERRED_LIFETIME (default: 30 minutes):  The
      minimum preferred lifetime required for an AIL prefix to be
      considered suitable for use by SNAC routers.  This value ensures
      that prefixes have sufficient lifetime to be reliably used for
      address autoconfiguration and communication establishment.

4.  Common requirements for adjacent infrastructure and stub networks

   This section specifies requirements that are common to both AIL and
   stub network links, as well as general requirements for SNAC routers.








Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


4.1.  Support for IPv6 Neighbor Discovery

   This specification requires that the AIL is able to support IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery (ND) [RFC4861], and specifically that IPv6 routers
   and on-link prefixes can be advertised using Router Advertisement
   messages and discovered using Router Solicitation messages.  The stub
   network link may also support Neighbor Discovery, or may use some
   different mechanism.

   When a SNAC router sends a Router Advertisement (RA) message as
   specified in this document, it MUST NOT use multiple RA messages with
   each containing a subset of the options.  Such splitting behavior is
   specified in Section 6.2.3 of [RFC4861].  Instead, all options are
   always included in a single RA message.  Multiple RA messages with
   different information contents are only sent to indicate that
   previously sent information changed.

   As part of standard IPv6 router behavior on the AIL interface, the
   SNAC router MUST join the All-Routers link-local multicast address
   (ff02::2) to receive Router Solicitation messages and other host-to-
   router and router-to-router communications, and MUST join the All-
   Nodes link-local multicast address (ff02::1) to receive Neighbor
   Solicitation messages and other host-to-host communications as
   described in [RFC4861].  If Neighbor Discovery, including Router
   Advertisements, is being used on the stub network, the SNAC router
   MUST similarly join these two multicast groups on the stub network
   interface as well.

4.2.  Supported network topologies

   A network topology of a single stub network connected via multiple
   SNAC routers to more than one AIL is explicitly out of scope of this
   document; such a topology will likely have a negative effect on the
   reachability and discoverability of hosts.

   If a SNAC router is able to determine that an AIL (other than its
   own) is already in use for its stub network, for example provided by
   one or more other SNAC routers or by other router types, it is
   advised that the SNAC router takes appropriate actions such as
   warning the user or ceasing to operate as a SNAC router until the
   situation is resolved.  How a SNAC router might detect this situation
   is however out of scope for this document.

   Similarly, a SNAC router that is simultaneously active on more than
   one AIL is explicitly out of scope of this document.  This means that
   a SNAC router also never provides routing between AILs when connected
   to more than one such link.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   A SNAC router that during its operation switches from its current AIL
   interface to a different AIL interface is explicitly out of scope of
   this specification.  For example, such a switch could be from Wi-Fi
   AIL to Ethernet AIL when its Ethernet AIL interface gets connected.

4.3.  Handling SNAC router restarts

   SNAC routers may restart from time to time; when a restart occurs,
   the SNAC router may have been advertising state to the network which,
   following the restart, is no longer required or would be no longer
   valid.

4.3.1.  Scenario 1: AIL on-link prefix changes after restart

   For example, suppose there are two SNAC routers connected to the same
   adjacent infrastructure link.  When the first SNAC router is no
   longer active on the AIL, the second takes over providing an on-link
   prefix.  Now the first router rejoins the link.  It sees that the
   second SNAC router's on-link prefix is advertised on the adjacent
   infrastructure link, and therefore does not advertise its own.

   This behavior can cause problems because the first SNAC router no
   longer sees the on-link prefix it had been advertising on
   infrastructure as 'on-link'.  Consequently, if it receives a packet
   from its stub network with a destination address matching this
   prefix, it will forward that packet directly to a default router, if
   one is present; otherwise, it will have no route to the destination,
   and will drop the packet.

   This amounts to a flash-renumbering event [RFC8978].  There is no
   easy way to prevent this from happening: routes and prefixes
   advertised in Router Advertisement messages have lifetimes, and hosts
   may continue to use the included prefixes until they expire.
   Applications that are not able to detect the loss of a route or that
   do not quickly notice that a host is no longer reachable on a
   particular address will exhibit poor performance when this happens.
   For example, if the stub network is a network that supports IoT
   devices, the user may experience temporary inability to control such
   devices, and automations may fail.

4.3.2.  Scenario 2: AIL on-link prefix remains the same after restart

   When possible, it is best if all SNAC routers serving a particular
   stub network use the same /64 on-link prefix for the AIL.  This
   solution is distinctly different from the scenario outlined above
   where each SNAC router allocates its own (random) ULA on-link prefix.
   For example, Thread [Thread] SNAC routers use bits from the Thread
   Extended PAN ID to generate the ULA prefix's Global ID and Subnet ID.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   The Global ID generation conforms to [RFC4193] because the Extended
   PAN ID is generated randomly using the same mechanism that is
   specified in RFC 4193 for the ULA prefix bits.

   Because the Extended PAN ID is a stable value that identifies the
   Thread network, it can be safely used to "number" the adjacent
   infrastructure link when no other suitable on-link prefix is
   available, and since it can be maintained by all Thread SNAC routers,
   there are no problems due to a change of the AIL on-link prefix.  Of
   course, when SNAC routers supporting more than one such stub network
   are present, the problem still exists in principle, but as long as
   all SNAC routers supporting a single stub network do not restart at
   the same time, the AIL on-link prefix can be expected to remain
   stable.

4.3.3.  Scenario 3: Off-Stub-Network Routable prefix change after
        restart

   Similarly, it can be the case that while a SNAC router is advertising
   the sole OSNR prefix on the stub network, it is rebooted or otherwise
   offline for a period of time.  In this case, if other SNAC routers
   are present, they can continue to advertise routes to that prefix on
   the AIL.  Ideally, the original OSNR prefix would be preserved by the
   other SNAC router(s) until the SNAC router that originally advertised
   it returns.  However, any coordination method to do so is out of
   scope of this specification.  In absence of such a coordination
   method, if a host on the stub network multicasts a Router
   Solicitation message to the stub network link and the SNAC router
   (that was previously advertising the OSNR prefix) is still not
   present, or if the OSNR prefix is in danger of expiring, another SNAC
   router will eventually take over and advertise its own OSNR prefix.
   In this situation, all SNAC routers that remember the old OSNR prefix
   continue advertising a route to it on the AIL until the old OSNR
   prefix expires.

5.  SNAC router functions

   This section specifies the SNAC router functions to manage the
   addressability, reachability and discoverability on both the adjacent
   infrastructure link (AIL) and on the stub network.  The reachability
   to IPv4-only hosts and services is separately specified in Section 6.










Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


5.1.  Managing addressability on an adjacent infrastructure link

   In order to provide IPv6 routing to the stub network, IPv6 addressing
   must be available on the AIL a SNAC router is attached to.  Ideally
   such addressing is already present on the AIL, and need not be
   provided.  However, if it is not present, the SNAC router must
   provide it.

5.1.1.  Suitable On-Link Prefixes

   SNAC routers must evaluate prefixes that are advertised on-link on
   the AIL as to their suitability for use in communicating with hosts
   on the stub network.  If no suitable prefix is found, a SNAC router
   MUST advertise one on the AIL.

   An on-link prefix is considered suitable if it is advertised on the
   link in a Prefix Information option ([RFC4861], Section 4.6.2) with
   the following Prefix Information option header values:

   *  Prefix Length is 64, suitable for IPv6 Stateless Address
      Autoconfiguration (SLAAC), consistent with current implementations
      of 64-bit interface identifiers in Section 2.5.1 of [RFC4291],

   *  'L' flag bit is set and

   *  either the 'A' flag bit or the 'P' flag bit [RFC9762] is set, and

   *  Preferred Lifetime of MIN_SUITABLE_PREFIX_PREFERRED_LIFETIME or
      higher.

   A prefix is not considered a suitable on-link prefix if the 'L' flag
   bit is not set, or if neither the 'A' flag bit nor the 'P' flag bit
   are set.  When the 'A' flag bit is not set, this indicates that
   individual node addresses cannot be configured with SLAAC.  In this
   case, typically addresses are managed using DHCPv6 [RFC9915], or (in
   rare cases) another method.  If the 'P' flag bit is set, then hosts
   that wish to allocate their own addresses can do so by acquiring a
   prefix from which to allocate them using DHCPv6 prefix delegation
   [RFC9663].  Nodes are not required to use DHCPv6 to acquire
   individual addresses, so a prefix that requires the use of DHCPv6 for
   that purpose can't be considered "suitable"—not all hosts can
   actually use it.

   Note: there can be layer-two networks where Neighbor Discovery is not
   supported and therefore the 'L' flag bit cannot be set, while the 'A'
   flag bit could be set.  The behavior of SNAC routers when connecting
   to such networks is out of scope for this document.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   A prefix is considered to be advertised on the link if, when a Router
   Solicitation message ([RFC4861], Section 4.1) is sent, a Router
   Advertisement message is received in response which contains a Prefix
   Information option ([RFC4861], Section 4.6.2) for that prefix.

   After an RA message containing a suitable on-link prefix has been
   received, it can be assumed for the indicated period of time (Valid
   Lifetime in the Prefix Information Option) thereafter that that
   prefix is still valid on the link.  However, prefix lifetimes and
   router lifetimes are often quite long.  In addition to knowing that a
   prefix has been advertised on the link in the past, and is still
   valid, it must therefore be ensured that at least one router that has
   advertised this prefix is still alive to respond to Router
   Solicitation messages.

5.1.2.  State Machine for maintaining a suitable on-link prefix on an
        adjacent infrastructure link

   The possible states of the SNAC router's AIL interface are described
   here, along with actions required to be taken to monitor the state.
   The purpose of the state machine described here is to ensure that at
   all times, when a new host arrives on the AIL, it is able to acquire
   an IPv6 address on that link using SLAAC.

   While in any of the states mentioned here except for STATE-UNKNOWN,
   the SNAC router is expected to treat its infrastructure interface as
   an advertising interface as described in Section 6.2.2 of [RFC4861].
   There are two sets of information that need to be sent in RA messages
   in general.  The first is the on-link prefix, if any, that is to be
   advertised on the AIL.  Whether or not such a prefix is advertised,
   and what exactly is advertised regarding that prefix, is determined
   by the state machine.  The second set of information is a set of
   routes to (OSNR) prefixes on the stub network.  Whenever the SNAC
   router knows of a reachable (scope is not link-local and not realm-
   local) prefix on the stub network, it includes an RIO option in the
   RA sent on the AIL indicating that that prefix is reachable through
   the SNAC router.

   In case neither of the two sets of information is present, the SNAC
   router MUST NOT send any RA message even if it is treating the
   infrastructure interface as an advertising interface.

   It is important to note that it is possible for an OSNR prefix to be
   advertised and then withdrawn on the stub network, but for it to
   still be valid, and for there to still be some communication
   occurring using that prefix.  In order to avoid prematurely
   interrupting such communication, the SNAC router maintains a list of
   OSNR prefixes known to be valid on the stub network, even if those



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   prefixes have been deprecated, and includes RIO options for all such
   prefixes in the RAs that it sends on the adjacent infrastructure
   link.  This is specified in Section 5.3.

   When a SNAC router enables its AIL interface as an advertising
   interface and determines it needs to send unsolicited RAs per
   Section 6.2.4 of [RFC4861], it MUST use a random delay between 0 and
   MAX_INITIAL_RTR_ADVERT_INTERVAL, instead of the effectively fixed
   delay of MAX_INITIAL_RTR_ADVERT_INTERVAL currently specified by
   [RFC4861].

   See Appendix B for more details on the contents of the RA message
   sent on the AIL.

5.1.2.1.  Status of IP addressability on adjacent infrastructure link
          unknown (STATE-UNKNOWN)

   When the SNAC router interface first connects to the AIL, it MUST
   begin router discovery as defined in Section 6 of [RFC4861].

   If, after router discovery concludes (by sending up to
   MAX_RTR_SOLICITATIONS as defined in Section 6.3.7 of [RFC4861]) and
   no suitable on-link prefix has been found, the router moves this
   interface to STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING (Section 5.1.2.3).

   If, during router discovery, a suitable on-link prefix is found, the
   router moves the interface to STATE-SUITABLE (Section 5.1.2.2).

5.1.2.2.  IP addressability already present on adjacent infrastructure
          link (STATE-SUITABLE)

   When a new host appears on the AIL and sends an initial Router
   Solicitation message, if it does not receive a suitable on-link
   prefix in a Router Advertisement, it will not be able to communicate.
   Consequently, the SNAC router MUST monitor Router Solicitation and
   Router Advertisement messages on the interface in order to determine
   whether a prefix that has been advertised on the link is still being
   advertised.  To accomplish this, the SNAC router uses two
   complementary methods: router staleness detection and neighbor
   unreachability detection.











Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


5.1.2.2.1.  Router staleness detection

   The SNAC router MUST listen for Router Advertisement messages on the
   AIL to which the interface is attached, and record the time at which
   each Router Advertisement was received.  The router MUST NOT consider
   any Router Advertisement that is older than STALE_RA_TIME to be
   suitable.  When the last non-stale Router Advertisement message
   containing a suitable prefix on the link is marked stale, the SNAC
   router MUST move the interface to STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING.

5.1.2.2.2.  Router Unreachability Detection

   For each suitable prefix, the SNAC router MUST monitor the state of
   reachability to the router(s) that advertised it as described in
   ([RFC4861], Section 7.3.1) using a ReachableTime value of no more
   than MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME.  The reason for this is that if no
   router providing the on-link prefix on the AIL is reachable, then
   when a new host first connects to the AIL, it will have no suitable
   on-link prefix to use for autoconfiguration, and thus will be unable
   to communicate with hosts on the stub network.

   Whenever the ReachableTime for a router advertising a suitable prefix
   exceeds MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME, the SNAC router MUST send
   unicast Neighbor Solicitation messages as described in Section 7.2.2
   of [RFC4861] until either a response is received, which resets
   ReachableTime to zero, or the maximum number of retransmissions has
   been sent.

   The SNAC router MUST listen for Router Solicitation messages on the
   AIL.  When a Router Solicitation message is received, if none of the
   on-link routers on the AIL are marked reachable, the SNAC router MUST
   move this interface to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING state
   (Section 5.1.2.3).

   If the scheduled time for sending a periodic unsolicited multicast RA
   message arrives, and there are no routers advertising suitable
   prefixes that have a ReachableTime that is less than
   MAX_SUITABLE_REACHABLE_TIME, then the router MUST move this interface
   to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING state.












Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


5.1.2.3.  IP addressability not present on adjacent infrastructure link
          (STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING)

   In this state, the SNAC router generates its own on-link prefix for
   the AIL.  This prefix has a valid and preferred lifetime of
   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME seconds.  The SNAC router sends a
   Router Advertisement (RA) message containing this prefix in a Prefix
   Information option (PIO).  In the PIO, the 'A' flag bit (autonomous
   address configuration), see Section 4.6.2 of [RFC4861], MUST be set
   and the 'L' flag bit (on-link) MUST also be set.  Link-layer
   technologies that require the 'L' flag bit to be cleared are out of
   scope of this document.

   The 'SNAC Router' flag bit ([I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]) MUST
   be set in the RA flags field.  The values of the 'M' and 'O' flag
   bits MUST be copied from the respective 'M' and 'O' flag bit values
   seen in the most recent (unicast or multicast) RA received from a
   non-SNAC-router.  For the selection of the most recent RA, the
   following RAs MUST be excluded:

   *  An RA received from a router longer ago than the Router Lifetime
      period indicated in the RA header.  This only applies for a non-
      zero Router Lifetime value.

   If there is no recent RA received from a non-SNAC-router, both 'M'
   and 'O' flag bits MUST be cleared.

   The sent Router Advertisement message MUST also include a Route
   Information Option (Section 2.3 of [RFC4191]) for each OSNR prefix
   advertised on the stub network.

   After having sent the initial Router Advertisement, the SNAC router
   moves the interface into the STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE state
   (Section 5.1.2.4).

5.1.2.4.  IP addressability provided by the SNAC router (STATE-
          ADVERTISING-SUITABLE)

   When entering this state, the SNAC router MUST begin treating the
   interface as an advertising interface as described in Section 6.2.2
   of [RFC4861] if it is not already doing so.

   The SNAC router sends a periodic unsolicited multicast Router
   Advertisement message, using the format described in Section 5.1.2.3,
   at a random time between MinRtrAdvInterval and MaxRtrAdvInterval.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   The SNAC router may receive a Router Advertisement message containing
   one or more suitable on-link prefixes on the AIL.  If any of these
   prefixes are different from the prefix the SNAC router is advertising
   as the on-link suitable prefix, and the 'SNAC Router' flag bit is not
   set in the Router Advertisement flags field, the SNAC router moves
   the interface to STATE-DEPRECATING (Section 5.1.2.5).

   If the 'SNAC Router' flag bit is set in the RA header flags field,
   then one of the following must be true in order for that prefix to be
   considered suitable:

   *  The prefixes are equal.  In this case, the interface remains in
      STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE.

   *  The prefix the SNAC router is advertising is a ULA prefix
      [RFC4193], and the received prefix is a non-ULA prefix.  In this
      case, the interface moves into the STATE-DEPRECATING
      (Section 5.1.2.5) state.

   *  Both prefixes are ULA prefixes, and the received prefix,
      considered as a 128-bit big-endian unsigned integer, is
      numerically lower, then the interface moves to STATE-DEPRECATING
      (Section 5.1.2.5).

   *  Otherwise the interface remains in STATE-ADVERTISING-SUITABLE.

5.1.2.5.  SNAC router deprecating the on-link prefix it is advertising
          (STATE-DEPRECATING)

   On entry to this state, the SNAC router has been treating the
   interface as an advertising interface as described in Section 6.2.2
   of [RFC4861], and MUST continue to do so.

   When the SNAC router has detected the availability of a suitable on-
   link prefix on the AIL to which the interface is attached, and that
   prefix is preferable to the one it is advertising, it continues to
   advertise its own prefix, but deprecates it:

   *  the preferred lifetime for its prefix is set to zero in subsequent
      Router Advertisement messages.

   *  the valid lifetime for its prefix is reduced with each subsequent
      Router Advertisement message.

   *  the usability of the infrastructure-provided on-link prefix is
      monitored as in the STATE-SUITABLE state; if during the
      deprecation period, the SNAC router detects that there are no
      longer any suitable prefixes on the link, as described in



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      Section 5.1.2.2.1 or in Section 5.1.2.2.2, it MUST return the
      interface to the STATE-BEGIN-ADVERTISING (Section 5.1.2.3) state
      and resume advertising its prefix with the valid and preferred
      lifetimes described there.

   In this state, the valid lifetime (VALID) is computed based on three
   values: the current time when a Router Advertisement message is being
   generated (NOW), the time at which the new suitable on-link prefix
   advertisement was received (DEPRECATE_TIME), and
   STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME.  All of these values are in seconds.
   VALID is computed as follows:

   VALID = STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME - (NOW - DEPRECATE_TIME)

   If VALID is less than MaxRtrAdvInterval seconds, the SNAC router does
   not include the deprecated prefix in the Router Advertisement.  Note
   that VALID could be less than zero.  Otherwise, the prefix is
   provided in the advertisement, but with a valid lifetime of VALID.

   If no more deprecated prefix(es) are included in its Router
   Advertisements, the deprecation is complete and the SNAC router
   returns to the state STATE-SUITABLE (Section 5.1.2.2).

5.2.  Managing addressability on the stub network

   How addressability is managed on stub networks depends on the nature
   of the stub network.  For some stub networks, the SNAC router can be
   sure that it is the only router.  For example, a SNAC router that is
   providing a Wi-Fi network for tethering [Tethering] will advertise
   its own SSID and use its own joining credentials; in this case, it
   can assume that it is the only router for that network, and advertise
   a default route and on-link prefix just like any other router.

   However, some stub networks are more cooperative in nature, for
   example IP mesh networks.  On such networks, multiple SNAC routers
   may be present and be providing addressability and reachability.

   In either case, one SNAC router connected to the stub network MUST
   provide a suitable on-link prefix (the OSNR prefix) for the stub
   network.  Section 5.2.2 details how a SNAC router satisfies this
   requirement by providing an OSNR prefix for its stub network if none
   is detected.  A generic method for SNAC routers, applicable to all
   stub network technologies, to coordinate who provides the OSNR prefix
   is out of scope of this specification.

   If the stub network is a multicast-capable medium where Router
   Advertisement messages are used for router discovery, then these RA
   messages are used to provide the OSNR prefix.  Appendix C describes



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   the contents of the RA messages for this case.  The arbitration
   mechanism of Section 5.1.2.4 is then used to converge on a single
   SNAC router advertising the numerically lowest OSNR prefix, with the
   difference that the value of the 'SNAC router' flag bit in received
   RA messages is disregarded and assumed to be set ('1') for the
   purpose of prefix arbitration.

   Stub networks that do not support the use of Router Advertisements
   for router discovery need to use some similar mechanism that is
   compatible with that type of network.  Describing the process of
   establishing a common OSNR prefix on such networks is out of scope
   for this document.  Some informative discussion on this topic is in
   Appendix D.

5.2.1.  Generating a per-SNAC-router ULA Site Prefix

   In order to be able to provide addressability either on the stub
   network or on the adjacent infrastructure link, a SNAC router MUST
   allocate its own ULA site prefix.  ULA prefixes, described in Unique
   Local IPv6 Unicast Addresses [RFC4193] are randomly allocated
   prefixes.  A SNAC router MUST allocate a single ULA site prefix for
   use in providing on-link prefixes to the stub network and the
   adjacent infrastructure link as described in Section 5.1.2.3.

   Any ULA link prefixes allocated by a SNAC router SHOULD persist
   across reboots, and SHOULD remain stable over time.  The consequence
   of not following either of these recommendations is that the stub
   network is effectively renumbered each time the SNAC router reboots,
   or the prefix changes otherwise: addresses configured from the
   previous prefix on the stub network become deprecated, established IP
   connections using those addresses break, and addresses cached by
   peers (e.g., in DNS records, or in application state) become stale
   until refreshed.  This hampers a timely and predictable operation of
   hosts on the stub network.

   An allowed exception to both these requirements is the following: for
   privacy reasons, a SNAC router that detects that its AIL changes
   SHOULD allocate a different ULA site prefix for the new AIL.  On this
   recommendation there are two possible exceptions:

   1.  The SNAC router remains connected to the same stub network, and
       the ULA site prefix value is generated based on properties of the
       stub network (such as configuration data - an example is the
       Thread Extended PAN ID detailed in Section 4.3).

   2.  The SNAC router is configured by the user or an administrator to
       behave otherwise.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   One implementation strategy to meet the above privacy requirement is
   to use the algorithm of Section 5 of [RFC7217] to generate "random
   but stable" bits (RID) for the ULA site prefix.  This will have the
   property that a SNAC router will reuse its prior ULA site prefix when
   it is reattached again to a particular AIL where it had been attached
   to before.

5.2.2.  Using DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation to acquire a prefix to provide
        addressability

   If DHCPv6 prefix delegation and IPv6 service are both available on
   the adjacent infrastructure link, and the SNAC router has detected
   that it needs to provide an OSNR prefix for its stub network, then
   the SNAC router MUST attempt to acquire a prefix using DHCPv6 prefix
   delegation.  Using an OSNR prefix provided by the infrastructure
   DHCPv6 prefix delegation service means (assuming the infrastructure
   is configured correctly) that routing is possible between the stub
   network links and all links on the infrastructure network, and
   possibly to the general Internet.

   By contrast, if the ULA prefix generated by the SNAC router is used,
   reachability is only possible between the stub network and the AIL.
   The OSNR prefix in this case is not known to the infrastructure
   network routing fabric, so even though packets might be able to be
   forwarded to the intended destination, there would be no return path.
   So when the only OSNR prefix that is available is the one generated
   by the SNAC router, cloud services will not be reachable via IPv6,
   and infrastructure-provided NAT64 will not work.  Therefore, when the
   SNAC router is able to successfully acquire one or more prefixes
   using DHCPv6-PD, it MUST use an acquired prefix rather than the ULA
   link prefix it allocated for the stub network.  Although only one
   acquired prefix is needed to provide the OSNR prefix for the stub
   network, there are reasons to acquire multiple prefixes, as detailed
   in the remainder of this section.

   A SNAC router MUST request one or more delegated prefixes of length
   64.  It does so by sending an IA_PD option for each prefix, each with
   a different IAID, containing an IA Prefix option with a hint for
   length 64 as described in Section 18.2.1 of [RFC9915].  If the SNAC
   router obtains a prefix with length less than 64, it generates a /64
   from the obtained prefix by padding with zeros.  If the SNAC router
   obtains a prefix with length greater than 64, the SNAC router MUST
   treat the prefix as unsuitable.  If no suitable prefix is obtained
   using DHCPv6-PD, it MUST use the allocated ULA link prefix for the
   stub network instead.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   When multiple prefixes are available for delegation (e.g., both
   Global Unicast Address (GUA) and Unique Local Address (ULA)
   prefixes), a SNAC router MUST select prefixes based on the following
   criteria, evaluated in order:

   *  Single OSNR prefix constraint: For constrained stub networks
      (e.g., 6LoWPAN, Thread mesh networks) that have limited support
      for multiple OSNR prefixes, a SNAC router MUST select only the
      single best prefix.  Prefix type GUA MUST be preferred over ULA,
      then the prefix with the longest preferred lifetime is chosen for
      distribution.

   *  Multiple OSNR prefix constraint: For stub networks without a
      "single OSNR prefix constraint", the GUA and ULA prefixes with the
      longest preferred lifetimes are chosen for distribution.
      Distributing both GUA and ULA prefixes allows hosts to decide how
      they will communicate.

   The timeout/lifetime-based selection ensures that the stub network
   avoids frequent renumbering events that can disrupt ongoing
   communications and create excessive maintenance overhead.  A SNAC
   router MUST monitor delegated prefix lifetimes and re-evaluate prefix
   selection when lifetimes are renewed or when new prefixes become
   available.

   A SNAC router MUST check in the server's Advertise message that the
   preferred lifetime a DHCPv6-PD server can offer is at least
   MIN_PD_PREFIX_LIFETIME prior to requesting a prefix delegation to
   that server.  If no DHCPv6-PD server can offer this, the SNAC router
   MUST treat all potential DHCPv6-PD prefixes as unsuitable and use the
   ULA link prefix allocated for the stub network instead.

   DHCPv6-PD leases obtained by a SNAC router, but not used because the
   prefix is not usable, MUST be released.

5.2.2.1.  Lifetime of IPv6 prefixes acquired using DHCPv6 Prefix
          Delegation

   It is possible that a SNAC router might obtain a prefix from a DHCPv6
   server using prefix delegation and then something about the
   infrastructure network attachment might change that affects the
   validity of that prefix for use on the stub network.  The section of
   [RFC9915] titled "Refreshing Configuration Information" discusses the
   various scenarios that can occur.  The DHCPv6 prefix delegation
   client being used by the SNAC router is assumed to conform to this
   specification.

   Situations that can occur include (but are not limited to):



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   *  DHCPv6 server becomes unavailable

   *  SNAC router is moved to a different link

   *  A renumbering event results in the old prefix being replaced with
      a new one

   The SNAC router MUST NOT use a prefix once the DHCPv6-PD client has
   determined that it is no longer valid.  If the DHCPv6-PD client
   provides a new prefix, and the old prefix is still valid, then:

   *  in a stub network where the "single OSNR prefix constraint"
      applies, the SNAC router MUST deprecate the old OSNR prefix at the
      same time that it first advertises the new OSNR prefix.

   *  in a stub network where the "multiple OSNR prefix constraint"
      applies, the SNAC router MAY deprecate the old OSNR prefix at the
      same time that it first advertises the new OSNR prefix.  The
      decision to deprecate immediately or later depends on the number
      of OSNR prefixes supported by the stub network technology and the
      number of valid OSNR prefixes already allocated; this is
      implementation-specific.

   If the DHCPv6-PD client determines that the prefix it provided to use
   as the OSNR prefix is no longer valid, and no replacement prefix is
   provided by the DHCPv6 server, then the SNAC router MUST switch to
   the ULA link prefix that it has allocated for use on the stub
   network.  In the case that the DHCPv6-PD client is unable to renew
   its lease on the current OSNR prefix, and time between the T2
   interval for the prefix assignment (Section 21.4 of [RFC9915]) and
   the end of the lease has been reached, then the SNAC router MUST
   deprecate the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR prefix and begin advertising
   the ULA link prefix.

   A failure to renew the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR prefix could be
   because the SNAC router has been disconnected from one AIL and moved
   to a different AIL.  In this situation, if the new AIL also has IPv6
   service and DHCPv6-PD service, the DHCPv6 client will get a clear
   indication that the old prefix is no longer valid.  However, it may
   be that no DHCPv6-PD service is available on the new link, either
   because it is an IPv4-only link or because it's an IPv6-capable link
   that doesn't provide DHCPv6 service.  In this situation, if the SNAC
   router remains connected to the link and no DHCPv6 service appears,
   the DHCPv6-PD-provided OSNR prefix will eventually time out and be
   replaced.  The SNAC router SHOULD NOT attempt to replace it prior to
   this normal timeout process, because there is no benefit to changing
   the OSNR prefix on the stub network in such a situation, and it's
   possible that the SNAC router will return to the other link before



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   the OSNR prefix expires.  The consequence of not following this
   recommendation is an unnecessary early renumbering of the stub
   network: the still-valid OSNR prefix is replaced by the ULA link
   prefix without any gain in reachability of stub network nodes.  It
   also risks introducing a second renumbering event, that is, back to
   the DHCPv6-PD-provided prefix.  Each renumbering event incurs the
   disruptions described in Section 5.2.1.

5.3.  Managing reachability on the adjacent infrastructure link

   A SNAC router MUST advertise reachability to stub network OSNR
   prefixes on its AIL interface using Route Information Options (RIOs)
   in Router Advertisement (RA) messages.  As specified in Section 4.1,
   these options are combined with other RA options, to avoid
   unnecessary multicast traffic.

   Each stub network will have some set of prefixes that are advertised
   as on-link for that network.  A SNAC router connected to that stub
   network SHOULD advertise reachability to all such prefixes on the AIL
   to which it is attached.  The exception case for this requirement is
   where the number of prefixes becomes too high to fit into a Router
   Advertisement message: then, a SNAC router MAY leave out deprecated
   prefixes and/or prefixes that become invalid soonest.  The
   consequence of leaving out a prefix is that this particular SNAC
   router won't be selected anymore as a new ingress router for IPv6
   packets (with that prefix) that are destined towards the stub
   network.

   A SNAC router MUST NOT advertise itself as a default router on its
   AIL by setting a non-zero Router Lifetime value in the header of its
   Router Advertisements.

   In case a new OSNR prefix is configured for its stub network (i.e.
   one which was not previously advertised on the AIL), a SNAC router
   MUST proactively advertise this new prefix on its AIL as defined in
   Section 6.2.4 of [RFC4861], fourth paragraph.  The exception case is
   where the SNAC router detects that another router is already
   advertising a route to this new OSNR prefix on the AIL: in this case,
   the SNAC router can optionally skip the proactive advertising.

5.4.  Managing reachability on the stub network

   The SNAC router SHOULD advertise itself as a default router on the
   stub network, if it detects that a default route is present on the
   AIL.  The consequence for not following this recommendation is that
   some hosts on the infrastructure network and/or hosts on the Internet
   potentially cannot be reached by a host on the stub network.  As an
   exception, in some cases it may not be desirable to advertise



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   reachability to the Internet as a whole; for such cases the SNAC
   router MAY be administratively configured to not advertise itself as
   a default router, or it MAY use an automated policy to make such a
   decision.

   A SNAC router MUST NOT advertise a default route lifetime on its stub
   network that is higher than the remaining default router lifetime on
   the AIL.  Also, when a SNAC router detects that the default route on
   the AIL is not available anymore (e.g. based on a received Router
   Advertisement message, or detecting that the default router is no
   longer available), it MUST stop advertising itself as a default
   router on the stub network.  On a stub network that supports IPv6 ND,
   this is done by sending its Router Advertisement messages with a zero
   value in the Router Lifetime field.

   If the SNAC router is not advertising itself as a default router on
   the stub network, it MUST advertise reachability to any prefixes that
   are being advertised as on-link on its AIL.  This is true for
   prefixes it is advertising, and for other prefixes being advertised
   on that link.  For stub networks supporting IPv6 Neighbor Discovery,
   reachability is advertised by Route Information Options (RIOs) in
   Router Advertisement messages (as detailed in Appendix C).  These
   RIOs are constructed such that they cover all the on-link prefixes on
   the AIL.  For stub networks that support another method, the
   respective other method is used.

   Note that in some stub network configurations, it is possible for
   more than one SNAC router to be connected to the stub network, and
   each SNAC router may be inadvertently connected to a different AIL.
   In this case, a SNAC router advertising a default route may receive a
   packet destined for a link that is not an AIL for that router, but is
   an AIL for a different router.  In such a case, if the infrastructure
   is not capable of routing between these two AILs, a packet which
   could have been delivered by another SNAC router will be dropped by
   the SNAC router that received it.

   As indicated in Section 4.2, support for multiple AILs connected to
   the same stub network is out of scope of this specification.
   Nevertheless, to support future versions of this specification or
   related extensions, which may provide support for multiple AILs, a
   SNAC router:

   *  SHOULD be configurable to not advertise itself as a default router
      on the stub network; and

   *  SHOULD be configurable to explicitly advertise AIL prefixes on the
      stub network even if it is advertising as a default router on the
      stub network.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   The mechanisms by which such configuration can be accomplished are
   out of scope for this document.  The consequence of not following
   either one of these recommendations is that the SNAC router most
   likely cannot operate in combination with newer SNAC router(s) that
   implement a future version/extension of this specification as defined
   above.  Instead, the SNAC router will likely have to be removed from
   operation before the newer SNAC router(s) can fully perform their
   functions that support multiple AILs.

   It is also possible that SNAC routers for more than one stub network
   are connected to the same AIL.  In this case, the SNAC routers will
   be advertising Route Information Options (RIO) in their Router
   Advertisement messages for their OSNR prefixes.  A SNAC router MUST
   track the presence of such routes, and MUST advertise reachability to
   them on its stub network interface.

5.5.  Providing discoverability between stub network links and
      infrastructure network links

   Since DNS-SD [RFC6763] is in wide use, and provides for ad-hoc, self-
   configuring advertising using the multicast DNS (mDNS) [RFC6762]
   transport, this is a suitable mandatory-to-implement protocol for
   stub networks, which must be able to attach to infrastructure
   networks without the help of new mechanisms provided by the
   infrastructure.  Therefore, a SNAC router MUST provide DNS-SD service
   as described in this section.

5.5.1.  Discoverability by hosts on adjacent infrastructure links

   The adjacent infrastructure link can be assumed to already enable
   some service discovery mechanism between hosts on the infrastructure
   network, and can be assumed to provide a local DNS resolver.
   Therefore, this document does not define a stub-network-specific
   mechanism for providing these services on the infrastructure network.

   In some cases it will be necessary for hosts on the AIL to be able to
   discover hosts on the stub network.  In other cases, this will be
   unnecessary or even undesirable.  For example, it may be undesirable
   for hosts on an AIL to be able to discover devices on a Wi-Fi tether
   provided by a mobile phone.

   One example of a use case for stub networks where such discovery is
   desirable is the constrained network use case.  In this case a low-
   power, low-cost stub network provides connectivity for IoT devices
   that provide services to the infrastructure.  For such networks, it
   is necessary that hosts on the infrastructure network are able to
   discover these devices on the stub network.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   The most basic use case for this is to provide feature parity with
   existing solutions like mDNS.  For example, a light bulb with built-
   in Wi-Fi connectivity might be discoverable on the adjacent
   infrastructure link to which it is connected, using mDNS, but likely
   is not discoverable on other links.  To provide equivalent
   functionality for an equivalent device on a constrained network that
   is a stub network, the stub network device must be discoverable on
   the infrastructure link (which is an AIL from the perspective of the
   stub network).

   If services are to be advertised using DNS-SD, there are in principle
   two ways to accomplish this.  One is to present services on the stub
   network as a DNS zone which can then be configured as a browsing
   domain in the DNS ([RFC6763], Section 11).  The second is to
   advertise stub network services on the AIL using mDNS.

   Because this document defines behavior for SNAC routers connecting to
   infrastructure networks that do not provide any new mechanism for
   integrating stub networks, there is no way for a SNAC router to
   provide DNS-SD service on an adjacent infrastructure link in the form
   of a DNS zone in which to do discovery.  Therefore, service on the
   adjacent infrastructure link MUST be provided using an Advertising
   Proxy, as defined in [I-D.ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy].

   One limitation of this solution is that it requires that hosts on the
   stub network use the DNS-SD Service Registration Protocol (SRP)
   [RFC9665] to register their DNS-SD services.  This means that in the
   case of a stub network used for Wi-Fi tethering, hosts using mDNS on
   the stub network will not be discoverable by hosts on the
   infrastructure network.  Any solution to this problem would require
   that the SNAC router provide a Discovery Proxy [RFC8766].  However, a
   discovery proxy is queried using DNS, not mDNS.  This requires
   assistance from the infrastructure network, and is therefore out of
   scope for this document.

5.5.2.  Providing discoverability of adjacent infrastructure hosts on
        the stub network

   Hosts on the stub network may need to discover hosts on the AIL, or
   on the stub network.  In an IoT use case, for example, there might be
   a light switch on the stub network which needs to be able to actuate
   a light bulb connected to the AIL.  In order to know where to send
   the actuation messages, the light switch will need to be able to
   discover the light bulb's address somehow.

   Because the stub network is managed by SNAC routers, any DNS resolver
   that's available on the stub network will necessarily be provided by
   one or more SNAC routers.  This means that the SNAC router can enable



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   discovery of hosts on the AIL by hosts on the stub network using a
   Discovery Proxy [RFC8766].  The Discovery Proxy can be advertised as
   available to hosts on the stub network through the DNS resolver
   provided on the stub network, as described in Section 11 of
   [RFC6763].

   By implication, this means that a SNAC router MUST provide a DNS
   resolver.  In addition, a SNAC router MUST provide a DNS zone for the
   AIL it is attached to, and MUST list this zone in the list of default
   browsing domains as defined in Section 11 of [RFC6763].  A SNAC
   router MUST provide a Discovery Proxy that operates with this DNS
   zone.

   A SNAC router may provide any valid DNS zone for which it can be
   authoritative.  However, in general the allocation and configuration
   of such zones is not automatic, and automatic configuration of such
   zones is out of scope for this document.  Unless otherwise
   configured, a SNAC router MUST use the 'default.service.arpa' zone
   for this purpose.

   The SNAC router MUST also maintain an SRP registrar and use
   registrations made through that SRP registrar to populate a DNS zone
   which is advertised as a default browsing domain, as defined above.
   Note that per Section 3.1.2 of [RFC9665] the special-use domain name
   'default.service.arpa' is always available for SRP registrations into
   this default DNS zone.  This SRP registrar MUST be advertised on the
   stub network either using the 'dnssd-srp' and/or 'dnssd-srp-tls'
   service names or some stub-network-specific mechanism, the details of
   which are out of scope for this document.  For example, Thread
   [Thread] SNAC routers advertise the IPv6 address of their SRP
   registrar through network-wide configuration data.

5.5.3.  DNS-over-TLS security

   A SNAC router MUST support DNS-over-TLS (DoT) as specified in
   Section 7 of [RFC9665] for any DNS unicast communication with hosts
   (acting as DNS clients) in the stub network.  This provides
   opportunistic privacy for SRP Updates as well as for DNS queries.
   See [RFC7435] for the "opportunistic security" concept and
   Section 3.1 of [RFC7858] for the opportunistic privacy profile as
   defined for DNS-over-TLS.  Support for non-opportunistic DNS-over-TLS
   is out of scope for this document.

   See Section 11 for security considerations related to this
   requirement.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


6.  Providing reachability to IPv4-only services to hosts on the stub
    network

   Stub networks rely on IPv6 to enable routing between links, which
   would not be possible with IPv4 due to the limited availability and
   functionality of IPv4 router discovery mechanisms (such as ICMP
   Router Discovery Messages [RFC1256]) compared to IPv6 Router
   Advertisements.  However, it can still be useful for hosts on the
   stub network to establish communications with IPv4-only hosts on the
   infrastructure network or the Internet.

   Although NAT64 [RFC6146] provides IPv6-only hosts with a way to reach
   IPv4-only hosts, there is no easy way for an IPv4-only host to use
   NAT64 to originate communication with a host using IPv6.  Therefore,
   a SNAC router enables hosts on the stub network to discover and reach
   IPv4-only hosts on infrastructure, but does not provide a way for
   IPv4-only hosts on infrastructure to communicate to (IPv6-only) hosts
   on the stub network.

   This should be acceptable, because hosts on the infrastructure
   network that need to communicate with hosts on the stub network are
   expected to be capable of using IPv6 to do so, and of course it is
   necessary that hosts on the stub network be capable of communicating
   using IPv6 since SNAC routers do not provide IPv4 service on their
   stub networks.

   So the purpose of providing IPv4 connectivity for stub network hosts
   is to enable communication with arbitrary IPv4-only hosts which may
   be on the AIL, elsewhere on the infrastructure network, or on the
   Internet.  This is accomplished by providing NAT64 address
   translation in the SNAC router, and by enabling service discovery
   using a Discovery Proxy in the SNAC router.

   A SNAC router MUST be capable of providing NAT64 service itself, and
   MUST be capable of discovering the availability of NAT64 service on
   the infrastructure network and providing it to its stub network when
   it is available and suitable.

   Some network media may provide their own mechanisms for advertising
   NAT64 service to the stub network.  If such a mechanism is available,
   a SNAC router MUST use the mechanism provided by the network medium
   used on the stub network to advertise NAT64 service.  Otherwise,
   NAT64 service MUST be advertised on the stub network using the PREF64
   Router Advertisement option [RFC8781].

   All the normative requirements in the remainder of this section
   (including subsections) apply to the default operation of a SNAC
   router.  A SNAC router SHOULD be administratively configurable to



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   disable and re-enable its NAT64 function.  The consequence of not
   following this recommendation is that a SNAC router's NAT64 function
   is always enabled; a network administrator then has no means to
   prevent hosts on the stub network from initiating communication to
   IPv4 destinations, for example to enforce an IPv6-only network policy
   or to comply with local security requirements, other than switching
   off the SNAC router.

   In case that the NAT64 function in a SNAC router is administratively
   disabled, these requirements do not apply as long as the NAT64
   function remains disabled.  Note that if NAT64 is disabled, the SNAC
   router's discovery and use of NAT64 service on the infrastructure
   network is also disabled.

   There are four possible combinations of circumstances in which to
   consider how to provide NAT64 service:

   1.  Infrastructure provides DHCPv6-PD support, and the infrastructure
       provides NAT64

   2.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6-PD support, infrastructure
       provides NAT64, and there is no IPv4 on infrastructure

   3.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6-PD support, infrastructure
       provides NAT64, and there is IPv4 on infrastructure

   4.  Infrastructure provides no DHCPv6-PD support, infrastructure
       provides no NAT64 (and may also not be providing IPv6), and there
       is IPv4 on infrastructure

   In the first case, infrastructure-provided NAT64 is preferred, and
   the SNAC router MUST advertise this NAT64 service to the stub
   network.

   In the second case, there is no way to provide connectivity to the
   infrastructure network: there is no IPv6 routing other than to the
   adjacent infrastructure link, because there is no routable prefix,
   and there is no NAT64 for the same reason, and there is no IPv4, so
   the SNAC router can't do NAT64 on its own.  In this case, the SNAC
   router MUST NOT advertise NAT64 service.

   In the third case, despite the infrastructure network providing
   NAT64, nodes in the stub network can't use it, so the SNAC router
   MUST provide its own NAT64 service.

   In the fourth case, the SNAC router MUST provide its own NAT64
   service.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 33]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   An additional complication is that there may be more than one SNAC
   router connecting the stub network to infrastructure.  In this case,
   it may be desirable to limit the number of SNAC routers providing
   NAT64 service, or it may be acceptable for all SNAC routers to
   provide it.

   In the latter case, this should not be a problem: since each SNAC
   router is using its own ULA site prefix to provide NAT64, any 5-tuple
   that goes through a SNAC router's NAT64 translator will necessarily
   have as its destination an IPv6 address in a particular NAT64 prefix,
   and that address will select the correct SNAC router through which to
   send the packet for translation.  This also works on the return path,
   because each SNAC router has its own IPv4 address, and the return
   packet will be destined for that IPv4 address, and hence will always
   return through the SNAC router that translated it on the way out.

   A further complication is that in some cases, some SNAC routers
   connected to the stub network may not be able to advertise an
   infrastructure-provided NAT64 prefix, while others may.  This can
   happen, for example, due to a stub network technology limitation on
   the number of (NAT64) prefixes that can be advertised simultaneously
   at any given time.  In such cases, when at least one infrastructure-
   provided NAT64 service is already advertised on the stub network, a
   SNAC router that was initially not able to advertise a NAT64 service
   on the stub network MUST stop attempting to advertise NAT64 service
   itself until the moment that there is no more NAT64 service
   advertised on the stub network.

   For stub network technologies that support the advertising of a NAT64
   service with an associated preference level, the below rules for
   preference level selection MUST be used.  Although the details of
   such a stub network technology's service advertisements are out of
   scope of this document, it is assumed that at least the three levels
   of 'low', 'medium', and 'high' can be distinguished with it.  For
   stub network technologies that don't support NAT64 preference levels
   (for example, technologies using the PREF64 option), these rules do
   not apply.

   To differentiate between infrastructure-provided NAT64 service and
   SNAC router-provided NAT64 service, a SNAC router that advertises
   infrastructure-provided NAT64 service with a preference level MUST
   use a preference of 'medium' for this service.  A SNAC router
   advertising its own service MUST use a preference of 'low'.

   In some cases a SNAC router may be administratively configured with a
   NAT64 prefix.  In this situation, the SNAC router MUST advertise the
   prefix with a preference of 'high'.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 34]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   A SNAC router MUST monitor the advertisement of other NAT64 prefixes
   on the stub network.  If a SNAC router is advertising a NAT64 prefix
   on a constrained stub network, and another NAT64 prefix is advertised
   on the stub network with a higher preference level, the SNAC router
   SHOULD deprecate the NAT64 prefix it is advertising.  This rule is
   based on the assumption that for a constrained stub network
   technology the size of the network configuration data needs to be
   minimized.  Exceptions to this rule specific to a stub network
   technology may apply.  The consequence of not following this rule
   depends on the stub network technology.  For a constrained stub
   network, it can be the case that a prefix entry is needlessly
   occupied (by the NAT64 prefix) in the network configuration data,
   potentially preventing another prefix entry to be advertised.

6.1.  NAT64 provided by infrastructure

   Stub networks are defined to be IPv6-only in this specification,
   while enabling IPv6 stub network hosts to use IPv4-only services and
   to communicate with IPv4-only hosts.  Ideally, the infrastructure
   network also fully supports IPv6, and all services on the
   infrastructure network are IPv6-capable.  In this case, perhaps the
   infrastructure network provides NAT64 service to enable communication
   with IPv4-only hosts on the Internet.  In this ideal setting, the
   SNAC router need do nothing—the infrastructure network is doing it
   all.

   In this situation, if there are multiple SNAC routers, each connected
   to the same AIL, there is no need for special behavior—each SNAC
   router can advertise a default route, and any SNAC router may be used
   to route NAT64 traffic.  If some SNAC routers are connected to
   different AILs than others, some of which support NAT64 and some of
   which do not, then the default route may not carry traffic to the
   correct link for NAT64 service.  Advertising (on the stub network) a
   specific route to the NAT64 prefix would resolve this issue.
   However, given that support for multiple AILs connected to the same
   stub network is out of scope (see Section 4.2), there are no
   normative requirements related to this for a SNAC router.

   In order for infrastructure-provided NAT64 to work, the stub network
   must have an OSNR prefix that is known to the infrastructure.
   Typically this means that the SNAC router must have acquired this
   prefix using DHCPv6 prefix delegation.  Unless otherwise configured
   to do so, the SNAC router MUST NOT advertise infrastructure-provided
   NAT64 service on the stub network if the OSNR prefix was not acquired
   through DHCPv6 prefix delegation.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 35]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


6.2.  NAT64 provided by SNAC router(s)

   Most infrastructure networks at present do not provide NAT64 service.
   Many infrastructure networks do not provide DHCPv6 prefix delegation.
   In these cases it is necessary for SNAC routers to be able to provide
   NAT64 service if IPv4-only hosts are to be reachable from the stub
   network.  Therefore, a SNAC router MUST be capable of providing NAT64
   service to the stub network.  When infrastructure-provided NAT64
   service is not present or is not usable, and when no other NAT64
   service is already advertised on the stub network, a SNAC router MUST
   enable its own NAT64 service and advertise it on the stub network.

   To provide NAT64 service, a SNAC router MUST allocate a /96 NAT64
   prefix.  For convenience, the SNAC router allocates a single prefix
   out of the ULA site prefix that it maintains.  Out of the 2^16
   possible subnets of the /48, the SNAC router SHOULD use the
   numerically highest /64 prefix and allocate the /96 NAT64 prefix from
   that.  The consequence of not following this recommendation is that
   the NAT64 prefix and addresses derived from it are harder to identify
   in stub network diagnostic/debugging/logging operations, and might be
   more easily confused with ULA link prefixes.

   If there are multiple SNAC routers providing connectivity between the
   stub network and infrastructure, each SNAC router uses its own NAT64
   prefix; there is no common NAT64 prefix.  The reason for this is that
   NAT64 translation is not stateless, and is tied to the SNAC router's
   IPv4 address.  Therefore, each NAT64 egress is not equivalent.

   This specification requires the stub network host itself to perform
   local IPv6 address synthesis, as needed, analogous to the customer-
   side translator (CLAT) function of 464XLAT [RFC6877].  This is the
   host-side equivalent of the network-based DNS64 [RFC6147] function.
   A SNAC router does not provide DNS64.

   A SNAC router MUST provide an explicit route to its NAT64 prefix on
   the stub network using RA or an equivalent protocol for that stub
   network type.

   In constrained networks it can be useful if a SNAC router's DNS
   resolver provides the information required to do DNS64 translation
   already in the answer to an AAAA query.  If the answer to an AAAA
   query has zero AAAA records (but not the NXDOMAIN response code),
   this suggests that there may still be an A record for the name.  In
   this case, the DNS resolver in the SNAC router MUST attempt to look
   up A record(s) on the same name, unless it is explicitly configured
   to disable such lookups.  If such A record(s) exist, the DNS resolver
   MUST provide these in the Additional section of the DNS response.  If
   the queried name is an alias, the chain of CNAME records leading from



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 36]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   the queried name to the canonical name is already present in the
   Answer section of the response, per standard CNAME processing
   (Section 3.6.2 of [RFC1034]); the A record(s) provided in the
   Additional section are in that case the A record(s) of the canonical
   name.

7.  Services Provided by a SNAC router

   In order to provide network access and meet the interoperability
   goals (see Section 1.1), a SNAC router provides various network
   services to its stub network.  In this document the following
   services have been discussed:

   DNS Resolver:  The SNAC router MUST provide a DNS resolver.  If RA
      messages are in use on the stub network, the DNS resolver is
      advertised in the Router Advertisement Recursive DNS Server
      (RDNSS) option.  If RA messages are not in use on the stub
      network, then the mechanism whereby the DNS resolver is advertised
      by the SNAC router is specific to that type of stub network.

   DHCPv6 Server:  The use of DHCPv6 on the stub network is NOT
      RECOMMENDED.  In some cases it may be necessary to support DHCPv6,
      but this MUST be disabled by default if the SNAC router provides
      this capability at all.  The consequence of nevertheless enabling
      DHCPv6, on one or more SNAC routers, is that any DHCPv6-assigned
      address may remain active on stub network hosts even when the
      DHCPv6-PD delegated prefix from which it ultimately derives has
      become invalid: an incorrect situation to be avoided.  This can
      happen when a DHCPv6 client in the stub network is unwilling to
      accept DHCPv6 Reconfigure messages, such that the DHCPv6 server in
      the SNAC router has no way to trigger this client to renew or
      release its address.  See Section 21.20 of [RFC9915] for more
      details.

   Discovery Proxy:  In order to discover services on the AIL, a SNAC
      router MUST act as a Discovery Proxy on the AIL to which it is
      attached.

   Advertising Proxy:  In order to advertise SRP-registered services on
      the AIL, a SNAC router MUST act as an Advertising Proxy on the AIL
      to which it is attached.

   SRP Registrar:  A SNAC router MUST provide SRP registrar service.
      This service MUST be advertised using DNS-SD in a legacy browsing
      domain (Section 11 of [RFC6763]) that is discoverable through the
      SNAC router's DNS resolver.

   Legacy Browsing Domains:  The DNS resolver in the SNAC router MUST



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 37]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      advertise a legacy browsing domain for its AIL, for the DNS zone
      that is maintained by its SRP service, and in addition it MUST
      list the legacy browsing domains provided by the infrastructure
      network, if any.

   NAT64:  A SNAC router needs to provide NAT64 service in particular
      circumstances so that (IPv6-only) hosts on the stub network can
      communicate with IPv4-only hosts on the infrastructure network and
      the global Internet.  See Section 6.2 for detailed requirements.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document updates the 'default.service.arpa' entry in the IANA
   service.arpa Subdomain registry [IANA-SERVICE-ARPA] by adding a
   second entry for that domain.  The new entry has the description
   "default Discovery Proxy browsing domain for SNAC routers."  The
   reference is to this document.  These two uses are mutually
   complementary; the reason for using a second entry is to make it
   clear which use case is described in which document.

9.  Operational Considerations

   This section discusses operational aspects of deploying, running and
   troubleshooting SNAC routers, following the guidance of [RFC5706].
   This section is informative.

9.1.  Deployment and initial setup

   A SNAC router is intended to be installed by a person who is not a
   network administrator, and intended to operate without any
   configuration (Section 1.2).  All parameters defined in Section 3
   have a default value that is expected to work in the deployment
   scenarios that this document targets, so that in a typical SNAC
   router product none of these parameters needs to be exposed to the
   user.

   No specific support is needed from the infrastructure network.  A
   SNAC router operates on an AIL that has no IP service, or provides
   only IPv4 service, or has IPv6 but no service beyond on-link
   addressing, or has full IPv6 service.  When the infrastructure
   network provides DHCPv6 prefix delegation (Section 5.2.2) or NAT64
   (Section 6.1) these services are used when they are found, which
   improves the reachability of the stub network.  When the
   infrastructure network provides a DNS resolver (Section 5.5.1), it is
   used to improve discoverability.  None of these services are required
   in order for the SNAC router to function.





Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 38]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   This document defines a few settings that a vendor can or should make
   configurable to facilitate expert users (see Sections 5.4, 5.5.2, 6,
   6.1, 6.2, 7 and 11); the mechanism to configure them is out of scope.

   Having multiple SNAC routers that serve the same stub network on the
   same AIL is an expected deployment; connecting SNAC routers that
   serve one stub network to more than one AIL is out of scope
   (Section 4.2) and is a deployment error that may be hard to diagnose.
   See Section 9.7.

   Network administrators who do not want SNAC routers to provide
   routing and addressability on their network (AIL) can filter Router
   Advertisement messages from unauthorized routers, for example using
   RA-Guard [RFC6105] [RFC7113].  If SNAC router functionality is wanted
   but addressability on the AIL is unwanted, an administrator can
   achieve this by providing IPv6 service and DHCPv6-PD on the AIL in
   combination with RA-Guard.  If the DHCPv6-PD delegated prefix is
   correctly routed by infrastructure routers to the node to which it
   was delegated, then the SNAC router will function correctly even
   though its Router Advertisement messages are being blocked.  This
   case is detailed in Appendix A.3.

9.2.  Impact on the infrastructure network and AIL

   SNAC routers are designed to coexist with routers that are already
   present on an AIL: a SNAC router provides an on-link IPv6 prefix on
   the AIL only when no suitable prefix is present, and stops doing so
   when a regular IP router starts to provide one (Section 5.1.2).

   Each SNAC router adds some traffic to the AIL: unsolicited multicast
   Router Advertisement messages, on average one every 3 minutes (with
   the default values); Router Advertisement messages sent in response
   to Router Solicitation messages; Neighbor Solicitation messages used
   to verify the reachability of the routers that advertise a suitable
   prefix (Section 5.1.2.2.2); and the mDNS traffic of the Discovery
   Proxy and the Advertising Proxy (Section 7).  This load is expected
   to scale linearly with the number of SNAC routers attached to the
   AIL.

   A SNAC router does not take over any function of the infrastructure
   network.  It never advertises itself as a default router on the AIL,
   and it advertises only specific routes to its stub network.

   On wireless-media AILs, wireless access points may filter, rate-
   limit, delay or convert multicast traffic [RFC9119].  This impacts
   multicast Router Advertisement messages and mDNS messages used by a
   SNAC router on its AIL, potentially degrading performance.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 39]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


9.3.  Operation when the adjacent infrastructure link fails

   There can be situations in which the AIL becomes unavailable or
   unusable for all the SNAC routers of a stub network at once.  That
   happens, for example, when a CE router, Wi-Fi access point or
   Ethernet switch connecting all the SNAC routers is powered off.

   Each SNAC router then can only perform a subset of its functions:
   provide addressability on the stub network and discoverability for
   stub network hosts.  Because no SNAC router is aware of the state of
   the AIL for its peer SNAC routers, the handling of this failure
   situation is necessarily identical to that in Section 9.4.

9.4.  Operation when the adjacent infrastructure link interface cannot
      be used

   There can be situations in which the AIL becomes unavailable or
   unusable for one SNAC router of a stub network, or a subset of SNAC
   routers of the stub network.  That happens, for example, when an
   Ethernet cable is unplugged, or a Wi-Fi link fails, or an Ethernet
   switch is powered off.

   If its AIL interface is down or the AIL is otherwise unusable, the
   SNAC router cannot perform all of its usual functions.  A SNAC router
   handles the case of an unusable AIL interface as if it were connected
   to a separate "degenerate" AIL.  The case of being connected to a
   separate (other) AIL is described in Section 4.2 and the handling of
   an unusable AIL interface is the same.

   That implies implementation-dependent handling: a SNAC router that is
   able to detect that at least one other SNAC router is connected to
   the same stub network, and is still connected to an AIL, can take
   appropriate action such as disabling all its SNAC router functions.
   As mentioned in Section 4.2, the means of detecting this is out of
   scope of this document.

   After the suggested action of disabling SNAC router functions is
   taken, the stub network continues to function -- with one fewer SNAC
   router.  Routing, addressability, service registration and service
   discovery will automatically be taken over by other SNAC routers
   (that do have AIL connectivity) as needed.










Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 40]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   If the only SNAC router on the stub network loses its AIL
   connectivity, or the last SNAC router (out of multiple on the stub
   network) loses its AIL connectivity, any DHCPv6-PD delegated prefix
   that this SNAC router is using as the OSNR prefix on the stub network
   continues to be used until it deprecates.  Therefore, a temporary AIL
   outage shorter than the remaining preferred lifetime of the delegated
   prefix will not result in a renumbering event, not upon loss of AIL
   connectivity, and not on regaining it.

   If the outage is longer than that, the delegated OSNR prefix becomes
   deprecated and the SNAC router uses the ULA OSNR prefix that it
   allocated itself (Section 5.2.1), so hosts on the stub network remain
   addressable (by ULA), and the SNAC router keeps providing the
   services listed in Section 7 to its stub network, in particular the
   DNS resolver and the SRP registrar.  Hosts on the stub network can
   therefore still discover each other and communicate with each other,
   but are isolated from the infrastructure network and from the
   Internet.

   Recovery from such a situation is automatic.  When the AIL becomes
   usable again, the state machine of Section 5.1.2 and (if available)
   DHCPv6 prefix delegation resume.  Note that a change from the self-
   allocated ULA OSNR prefix to a delegated OSNR prefix, or vice versa,
   is a renumbering event for the stub network: existing connections
   that use an address from the old OSNR prefix can break, and it takes
   time for new connections to be made using an address from the new
   OSNR prefix (Section 5.2.1, Section 4.3).

9.5.  Operation when a SNAC router fails or is removed

   When one SNAC router of a stub network fails or is removed while
   other SNAC routers of that stub network remain, the remaining SNAC
   routers take over the functions of the failed one, as described in
   Section 4.3, Section 9.4 and Appendix D.  During such a takeover, the
   OSNR prefix(es) of the stub network may change, with the same
   consequences as described in the previous section for a renumbering
   event.

9.6.  Diagnostic information

   SNAC router functions are automatic and the resulting state is not
   visible to a user.  When something fails, the information needed to
   find the cause is the state that the SNAC router derived from what it
   observed on its links, and the history of the changes in that state.
   A SNAC router can be a device without a console or a local user
   interface: if so, it is useful to expose this information in a
   companion application, a web interface, or a log that can be exported
   from the device.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 41]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   Renumbering events, prefix deprecations/invalidations, a change of
   router that provides the on-link prefix on the AIL, and the loss or
   return of a default route on the AIL are the events that could best
   explain a user-visible failure, so recording such events with a
   timestamp is especially useful.  The SNAC router's clock should be
   synchronized via NTP when available; otherwise, (relative) system
   uptime can be used for timestamps.

9.7.  Troubleshooting failure situations

   The following failure situations could be encountered, among others.
   For each, the failure condition is given first, followed by possible
   diagnosis means and remedies.  See Appendix D for a more detailed
   discussion of related failure situations.

   Multiple AILs connected to a single stub network:
      SNAC routers that serve the same stub network are attached to
      different AILs.  This topology is out of scope for this document
      (Section 4.2) and causes packets to be dropped when they are
      forwarded to an AIL from which the destination is not reachable
      (Section 5.4).  A typical symptom can be that only a subset of
      stub network hosts are discoverable from an AIL, and which subset
      depends on the AIL to which the discovering host is attached.
      That is because hosts on the stub network may register their
      services with the SRP registrar of any SNAC router, so each AIL
      only "sees" the subset of services that is proxied by the SNAC
      router(s) attached to it.  The easiest remedy is to disconnect all
      SNAC routers except one, followed by re-enabling additional SNAC
      routers (as needed) while ensuring these are connected to the same
      AIL.

   AIL interface and stub network interface are swapped:
      The AIL interface of the SNAC router is attached to the stub
      network and vice versa the stub network interface is attached to
      the actual AIL.  This can only happen when both interfaces use a
      technology that the SNAC router could use for either function,
      such as two Ethernet ports; it cannot occur when the stub network
      uses a different L2 technology than the AIL.  This situation is
      unlikely to occur because the purpose of a SNAC router is to
      connect an infrastructure network to a stub network that is in
      some way incompatible at layer 2.  Nevertheless, if there were
      such a SNAC router product and the interfaces were swapped, a
      clear diagnosis is a Router Advertisement message with the 'SNAC
      router' flag bit set to '1' that is seen on the stub network link.
      Because a SNAC router sets this flag only in the Router
      Advertisement messages that it sends on its AIL interface (see
      Appendix B and Appendix C), the flag bit value '1' should never be
      seen on the stub network under correct operation.  A SNAC router



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 42]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      that receives such a message with flag bit '1' on the stub network
      interface should take appropriate action like warning the user or
      disabling the network port/link connecting the offending device,
      until the situation is resolved.

   SNAC routers are concatenated/chained:
      A failure mode mentioned in Section 1 is the concatenation or
      chaining of two or more SNAC routers.  That means a SNAC router is
      attached via its AIL interface to the stub network of another SNAC
      router.  This can only happen when both interfaces use a
      technology that the SNAC router can use for either function, such
      as Ethernet or Wi-Fi.  This situation is unlikely to occur because
      the purpose of a SNAC router is to connect incompatible networking
      technologies as mentioned in the previous case.  The detection/
      diagnosis method for this case is the same as described in the
      previous case: detecting a Router Advertisement message with a
      'SNAC router' flag bit set to '1' on the stub network link.  A
      SNAC router that receives such a message should take appropriate
      action like warning the user or disabling the network port/link
      connecting the offending (chained) SNAC router, until the
      situation is resolved.

   Router Advertisement messages of the SNAC router are blocked on
   the AIL:
      The infrastructure network can filter Router Advertisement
      messages from unauthorized routers, for example using RA-Guard
      [RFC6105] [RFC7113].  Services on the stub network are then still
      discoverable on the infrastructure network, because multicast DNS
      is not affected, but hosts on the AIL do not install a route to
      the OSNR prefix and therefore cannot reach stub network hosts.
      Communication that is originated by stub network hosts and uses
      SNAC-router-provided NAT64 keeps working.  This can be diagnosed
      by verifying on a host on the AIL that no route to the OSNR prefix
      is present, while the SNAC router logs that it is advertising a
      Route Information Option for that prefix.  The remedies are
      described in Appendix A.3: enabling DHCPv6 prefix delegation on
      the infrastructure network, or exempting the SNAC router's port or
      MAC address from the RA-Guard function.  In the first case the
      delegating router installs a route to the delegated OSNR prefix
      with the SNAC router as the next hop, so hosts on the AIL reach
      the stub network via their own default router using hairpinning,
      and the SNAC router's Route Information Option is not needed.
      This requires that the delegating router is on the forwarding path
      between the infrastructure network and the AIL.

   Frequent renumbering of the stub network:
      The OSNR prefix of the stub network changes repeatedly, so that
      hosts on the stub network are intermittently unreachable and



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 43]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      applications or automations that depend on them fail from time to
      time.  A restart of a SNAC router by itself does not renumber the
      stub network: a SNAC router is expected to persist any self-
      generated OSNR prefix across reboots (Section 5.2.1), and a
      DHCPv6-PD based OSNR prefix is typically unchanged when requesting
      the prefix lease after reboot.  Causes of repeated renumbering may
      include a SNAC router that regenerates its ULA site prefix based
      on particular conditions as specified in this document (e.g., for
      privacy), and repeated restarts in which the SNAC router stays
      offline long enough for another SNAC router to take over the role
      of advertising the OSNR prefix with a prefix of its own
      (Section 4.3).  Other causes include an AIL attachment that is
      repeatedly lost and regained (Section 9.4), where the time
      duration of AIL loss is longer than the lifetime of the DHCPv6-PD
      delegated prefix on which the OSNR prefix is based, or a DHCPv6-PD
      service that offers short lifetimes or a different prefix on each
      lease renewal attempt, or a mesh-type stub network that repeatedly
      partitions and heals (Appendix D).  The timestamped record of
      prefix changes described in Section 9.6 identifies which event
      triggered each renumbering; comparing the records of the
      individual SNAC routers shows which one initiated it.  The remedy
      is to remove the underlying instability, for example by removing a
      SNAC router that does not persist its ULA site prefix across
      reboots, or does not persist its ULA OSNR prefix, or by improving
      the AIL attachment (cabling) of the SNAC router, or by configuring
      longer prefix lifetimes on the infrastructure network DHCPv6-PD
      server.

10.  Implementation Status

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   This section records the status of known implementations of the
   protocol defined by this specification at the time of posting of this
   Internet-Draft, and is based on [RFC7942].  Note that other
   implementations than the ones described here may exist.

10.1.  OpenThread

   Organization:
      The OpenThread project.  OpenThread was released by Google and is
      developed as an open-source project with contributions from a
      range of silicon vendors and product vendors.

   Name and location:
      OpenThread.  Documentation is at https://openthread.io; the source
      code is at https://github.com/openthread/openthread (the protocol
      stack, including the Border Routing Manager, the SRP server and



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 44]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      the DNS-SD server) and at https://github.com/openthread/ot-br-
      posix (the OpenThread Border Router (OTBR) application for POSIX-
      based platforms).

   Description:
      OpenThread is an implementation of Thread [Thread].  A Thread
      Border Router built from OpenThread and OTBR is a SNAC router: the
      Thread mesh network is the stub network and the Wi-Fi or Ethernet
      link to which the border router is also attached is the adjacent
      infrastructure link (AIL).  The SNAC router functions are
      implemented mainly by the Border Routing Manager (src/core/
      border_router/), the SRP server, the DNS-SD server and the NAT64
      translator (src/core/net/), and by the mDNS-based Advertising
      Proxy and Discovery Proxy of OTBR that operate on the AIL.

   Level of maturity:
      Production; widely used.  OpenThread is used in certified Thread
      products that implement the features defined in the Thread 1.4
      specification [Thread], which includes the Thread Border Router
      features that implement the SNAC router functions.

   Version compatibility:
      The Thread 1.4 specification [Thread] references revision -06 of
      this document.  Support for the 'SNAC router' flag was added to
      OpenThread in September 2024.

   Licensing:
      Open source, using the BSD 3-Clause license.

   Implementation experience:
      *  The default values of several constants in Section 3 correspond
         to values that were already in use in deployed OpenThread-based
         border routers; the specification and the implementation have
         converged on these values over time.

      *  Thread is an example of a stub network technology that does not
         use RA messages on the stub network link: the OSNR prefix, the
         routes and the addresses of the DNS resolver and SRP registrar
         are distributed using Thread Network Data.  This supports the
         approach of Section 5.2 to leave the mechanism used on the stub
         network to the stub network technology.










Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 45]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      *  Thread is a stub network technology that explicitly supports
         operating multiple SNAC routers of the same stub network on one
         AIL.  This lead to some Thread-specific functions in the
         implementation, such as the use of stub-network-wide shared
         configuration data to help detect OSNR prefixes and coordinate
         tasks among the multiple SNAC routers.  These functions are out
         of scope of this document.

   Interoperability:
      The behavior of the SNAC router on the AIL is covered by test
      cases included in the automated test suite of OpenThread; they
      verify, among other things, that the 'SNAC router' flag is set and
      that a Route Information Option for the OSNR prefix is advertised
      on the AIL.  Scenarios with multiple SNAC routers on one AIL are
      regularly tested in simulation.

   Contact information:
      The OpenThread community discussion forum at
      https://github.com/openthread/openthread/discussions, and the
      issue trackers of the repositories listed above.

   Date of last update:
      2026-08-20

11.  Security Considerations

   Because a SNAC router operates as an IPv6 router that sends and
   receives IPv6 Neighbor Discovery protocol messages, the security
   considerations of Section 11 of [RFC4861] apply.

   And because a SNAC router operates as an SRP registrar, the security
   and privacy considerations of Section 6 and 7 of [RFC9665] apply.

   Specific considerations for SNAC routers connected to an
   infrastructure network that has deployed RA-Guard [RFC6105] [RFC7113]
   can be found in Appendix A.3.

   Secure DNS communications with the SNAC router is enabled by DNS-
   over-TLS as defined in Section 5.5.3.  This provides opportunistic
   security [RFC7435] and opportunistic privacy (Section 3.1 of
   [RFC7858]).  It prevents eavesdroppers on the stub network that are
   not able to intercept the TLS connection from determining what
   queries are being made.  However, there is no protection against
   connection interception on the stub network other than that it may be
   difficult to accomplish.






Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 46]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   There is also no guarantee that privacy-preserving DNS service will
   be available on the AIL.  When such DNS service is present, the SNAC
   router SHOULD use it, if it is technically capable of doing so.  The
   exception to this recommendation is when the SNAC router is
   administratively configured to use another DNS service.  The
   consequence of not following this recommendation is that DNS queries
   originating from stub network hosts are forwarded over the
   infrastructure network possibly without encryption, so that the
   opportunistic privacy provided by DNS-over-TLS on the stub network is
   lost on the AIL: an on-path observer can see which names stub network
   hosts are querying.

   However, there is no way to signal on the stub network that privacy-
   preserving DNS lookups are being done.  Given that the privacy
   profile supported here is opportunistic, the DNS client has no
   guarantee of privacy.  Aggregation of queries originating from the
   stub network by the SNAC router provides some degree of
   anonymization, but in any case because the TLS server's certificate
   is not being validated by the client, the client can't assume it is
   getting more privacy than an unauthenticated TLS connection can
   deliver.

   If a SNAC router receives a DNS query protected by TLS from a stub
   network host, it may happen that the query is forwarded without TLS
   security to the upstream DNS resolver that is configured by the
   infrastructure network.  This enables an on-path eavesdropper in the
   infrastructure network to observe any DNS queries that the SNAC
   router forwards to the upstream DNS resolver, or an on-path attacker
   to spoof DNS responses to such queries.

   Stub network hosts that implement DNSSEC [RFC9364] can perform DNSSEC
   validation of DNS responses received from the DNS resolver on the
   SNAC router.

12.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, DOI 10.17487/RFC1034, November 1987,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1034>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4191]  Draves, R. and D. Thaler, "Default Router Preferences and
              More-Specific Routes", RFC 4191, DOI 10.17487/RFC4191,
              November 2005, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4191>.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 47]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, DOI 10.17487/RFC4193, October 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4193>.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, DOI 10.17487/RFC4291, February
              2006, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4291>.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4861, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6052, October 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6052>.

   [RFC6146]  Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. van Beijnum, "Stateful
              NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6
              Clients to IPv4 Servers", RFC 6146, DOI 10.17487/RFC6146,
              April 2011, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6146>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.

   [RFC6763]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "DNS-Based Service
              Discovery", RFC 6763, DOI 10.17487/RFC6763, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6763>.

   [RFC7858]  Hu, Z., Zhu, L., Heidemann, J., Mankin, A., Wessels, D.,
              and P. Hoffman, "Specification for DNS over Transport
              Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7858, DOI 10.17487/RFC7858, May
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7858>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.

   [RFC8766]  Cheshire, S., "Discovery Proxy for Multicast DNS-Based
              Service Discovery", RFC 8766, DOI 10.17487/RFC8766, June
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8766>.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 48]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   [RFC8781]  Colitti, L. and J. Linkova, "Discovering PREF64 in Router
              Advertisements", RFC 8781, DOI 10.17487/RFC8781, April
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8781>.

   [RFC9499]  Hoffman, P. and K. Fujiwara, "DNS Terminology", BCP 219,
              RFC 9499, DOI 10.17487/RFC9499, March 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9499>.

   [RFC9663]  Colitti, L., Linkova, J., Ed., and X. Ma, Ed., "Using
              DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation (DHCPv6-PD) to Allocate Unique
              IPv6 Prefixes per Client in Large Broadcast Networks",
              RFC 9663, DOI 10.17487/RFC9663, October 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9663>.

   [RFC9665]  Lemon, T. and S. Cheshire, "Service Registration Protocol
              for DNS-Based Service Discovery", RFC 9665,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9665, June 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9665>.

   [RFC9762]  Colitti, L., Linkova, J., Ma, X., Ed., and D. Lamparter,
              "Using Router Advertisements to Signal the Availability of
              DHCPv6 Prefix Delegation to Clients", RFC 9762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9762, June 2025,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9762>.

   [RFC9915]  Mrugalski, T., Volz, B., Richardson, M., Jiang, S., and T.
              Winters, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
              (DHCPv6)", STD 102, RFC 9915, DOI 10.17487/RFC9915,
              January 2026, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9915>.

   [I-D.ietf-dnssd-advertising-proxy]
              Cheshire, S., Lemon, T., and E. Dijk, "Advertising Proxy
              for DNS-SD Service Registration Protocol", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-dnssd-advertising-
              proxy-06, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dnssd-
              advertising-proxy-06>.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]
              Hui, J., "SNAC Router Flag in ICMPv6 Router Advertisement
              Messages", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-
              6man-snac-router-ra-flag-08, 5 June 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-6man-
              snac-router-ra-flag-08>.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-rfc7084bis]
              Lencse, G., Martinez, J. P., Patton, B., and T. Winters,
              "Basic Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge Routers", Work



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 49]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-v6ops-rfc7084bis-
              06, 6 July 2026, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
              draft-ietf-v6ops-rfc7084bis-06>.

13.  Informative References

   [RFC1256]  Deering, S., Ed., "ICMP Router Discovery Messages",
              RFC 1256, DOI 10.17487/RFC1256, September 1991,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1256>.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2328, April 1998,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2328>.

   [RFC4944]  Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
              "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4
              Networks", RFC 4944, DOI 10.17487/RFC4944, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4944>.

   [RFC5706]  Harrington, D., "Guidelines for Considering Operations and
              Management of New Protocols and Protocol Extensions",
              RFC 5706, DOI 10.17487/RFC5706, November 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5706>.

   [RFC6105]  Levy-Abegnoli, E., Van de Velde, G., Popoviciu, C., and J.
              Mohacsi, "IPv6 Router Advertisement Guard", RFC 6105,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6105, February 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6105>.

   [RFC6147]  Bagnulo, M., Sullivan, A., Matthews, P., and I. van
              Beijnum, "DNS64: DNS Extensions for Network Address
              Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Servers", RFC 6147,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6147, April 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6147>.

   [RFC6282]  Hui, J., Ed. and P. Thubert, "Compression Format for IPv6
              Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based Networks", RFC 6282,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6282, September 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6282>.

   [RFC6877]  Mawatari, M., Kawashima, M., and C. Byrne, "464XLAT:
              Combination of Stateful and Stateless Translation",
              RFC 6877, DOI 10.17487/RFC6877, April 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6877>.







Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 50]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   [RFC7113]  Gont, F., "Implementation Advice for IPv6 Router
              Advertisement Guard (RA-Guard)", RFC 7113,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7113, February 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7113>.

   [RFC7217]  Gont, F., "A Method for Generating Semantically Opaque
              Interface Identifiers with IPv6 Stateless Address
              Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", RFC 7217,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7217, April 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7217>.

   [RFC7435]  Dukhovni, V., "Opportunistic Security: Some Protection
              Most of the Time", RFC 7435, DOI 10.17487/RFC7435,
              December 2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7435>.

   [RFC7942]  Sheffer, Y. and A. Farrel, "Improving Awareness of Running
              Code: The Implementation Status Section", BCP 205,
              RFC 7942, DOI 10.17487/RFC7942, July 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7942>.

   [RFC8305]  Schinazi, D. and T. Pauly, "Happy Eyeballs Version 2:
              Better Connectivity Using Concurrency", RFC 8305,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8305, December 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8305>.

   [RFC8978]  Gont, F., Žorž, J., and R. Patterson, "Reaction of IPv6
              Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC) to Flash-
              Renumbering Events", RFC 8978, DOI 10.17487/RFC8978, March
              2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8978>.

   [RFC9119]  Perkins, C., McBride, M., Stanley, D., Kumari, W., and JC.
              Zúñiga, "Multicast Considerations over IEEE 802 Wireless
              Media", RFC 9119, DOI 10.17487/RFC9119, October 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9119>.

   [RFC9364]  Hoffman, P., "DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC)", BCP 237,
              RFC 9364, DOI 10.17487/RFC9364, February 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9364>.

   [IANA-SERVICE-ARPA]
              IANA, "service.arpa Subdomain Registry (Locally-Served DNS
              Zones Registry Group)", <https://www.iana.org/assignments/
              locally-served-dns-zones/locally-served-dns-
              zones.xhtml#service-arpa-subdomain>.







Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 51]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   [Tethering]
              Wikipedia, "Tethering", March 2026,
              <https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
              index.php?title=Tethering&oldid=1343931068>.

   [IEEE802.15.4]
              IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Low-Rate Wireless Networks", IEEE
              Std 802.15.4-2024, DOI 10.1109/IEEESTD.2024.10794632,
              December 2024,
              <https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/802.15.4/11041/>.

   [Thread]   Thread Group, "Thread 1.4.1 Specification", January 2026,
              <https://www.threadgroup.org/ThreadSpec>.

Appendix A.  Analysis of deployment scenarios in which a SNAC router
             could cause problems

   This appendix is informative.

A.1.  Unmanaged home network

   In this scenario, a non-expert home user connects a SNAC router to
   their own unmanaged home network.  This is the key intended use case
   for stub networks.  This document describes how to implement a SNAC
   router such that it operates correctly in this situation, whether the
   ISP is providing IPv6 reachability to the Internet or not.

   In some unmanaged network settings, there is a "guest" network in
   addition to the main network.  In this configuration, if a SNAC
   router is added to the guest infrastructure network, no communication
   between that router's stub network and other nodes in the home will
   be possible.  The general intended behavior of the guest network is
   to isolate untrusted hosts.  Since this would be the intended
   behavior on the part of the owner of the network, it won't be a
   surprise to them, since they had to explicitly give the SNAC router's
   owner the guest network credentials and not the main network
   credentials.  This should also mean that the owner of the SNAC router
   will not expect it to fully function in this scenario.

   An additional feature of some unmanaged networks is that the owner of
   the network can choose to isolate all devices on the network, so that
   devices on the network are able to use the Internet, but not
   communicate with each other.  In this case, one can assume that the
   owner of the network doesn't expect any devices attached to the
   network to be able to communicate with any other device, so the
   failure of devices connected to infrastructure to communicate with
   devices on the stub network would not be a surprise.  The owner of
   the SNAC router might be surprised in this case, but ultimately the



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 52]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   owner of the infrastructure network gets to make this decision, and
   there isn't anything a SNAC router can or should do on behalf of the
   SNAC router's owner in this case.

A.2.  Use on an unmanaged (non-home) IPv6 network

   In this scenario there is a site that is not a home, so perhaps a
   restaurant or business, where there is no network administrator per
   se, and the network is deployed similarly to a home network.  There
   is little difference between this scenario and an unmanaged home
   network, but expectations may be different.  In particular, it is
   very common in such settings for there to be a guest network for
   visitors, or for the network to enforce isolation between all nodes
   connected to it.

A.3.  Use on a managed network

   In this scenario, a non-expert user attaches a SNAC router to an
   infrastructure network that's managed and provides both IPv6 and
   IPv4.  This network has correctly deployed RA-Guard [RFC6105]
   [RFC7113] and/or port-based access control.  As a result, the SNAC
   router won't succeed in advertising a prefix on the managed network.
   Communications originating on the stub network that are able to
   communicate using NAT64 will still work.

   In the managed network case, it's possible that the network
   administrator is willing to permit SNAC routers to be attached to the
   network by users.  In this case, they might either not deploy RA-
   Guard, or they might deploy working DHCPv6 prefix delegation.  This
   could be PD-per-host (where hosts are encouraged to use prefix
   delegation) or just ordinary prefix delegation (where hosts are given
   prefix delegation if they ask for it, but not encouraged to ask for
   it).

   In such a situation, if DHCPv6-PD works on the adjacent
   infrastructure link, the SNAC router will function correctly, because
   the delegated prefix will be correctly routed.

   It's worth noting that devices that behave like SNAC routers already
   exist: they attach to the infrastructure network as regular IPv4-only
   hosts, and offer IPv6 connectivity to an internal stub network which
   may not even be apparent to the user.  Such a device is not relying
   on RA messages to function because it's using its IPv4 address and
   NAT64 to provide Internet connectivity, so there is no management
   issue even if RA messages are blocked by RA-Guard on the
   infrastructure network.  This is a reasonable use case, and this
   specification does in fact enable it.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 53]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   When a SNAC router is attached to an infrastructure network that has
   deployed RA-Guard and does not support DHCPv6 prefix delegation, and
   where that infrastructure network does allow the use of multicast
   DNS, services advertised on the stub network will be discoverable on
   the infrastructure network, but will not be reachable, by default.

   If the RA-Guard implementation allows an administrator to disable the
   RA-Guard function on a specific Ethernet port or for a specific MAC
   address, this feature can be used to allow full SNAC router
   functionality in this managed network case.

A.3.1.  Managed networks where DHCPv6 is required but RA-Guard is not
        present

   There can be a case where an infrastructure network does not
   implement RA-Guard, does not advertise what a SNAC router considers
   to be a "suitable" prefix, and does provide addressing using DHCPv6
   IA_NA.  In this situation, it could be the case that two ULA prefixes
   are being advertised as on-link on the AIL and one is being
   advertised as permitting autonomous address configuration.  The
   latter is the ULA on-link prefix being provided by a SNAC router.

   In case a host on the AIL attempts to communicate with a host using a
   site ULA prefix on a different link, it may choose a ULA address as
   its source address.  If it were to choose the autonomously-configured
   ULA address as its source address, this would fail, because there is
   no route back from the different link to the SNAC-router-provided ULA
   OSNR prefix.

   However, this can only happen in practice if the host did not receive
   an address from DHCPv6.  In this case, the host would not be able to
   communicate anyway.  The problem that might occur here is that a
   series of IPv6 packets with an unexpected source address are sent to
   a node on another link, and that node would be unable to send a
   response.

   In such scenarios there is no way to actually know based on the
   network configuration what the administrator's intention was.  An
   administrator that sees a problem with this can react by implementing
   RA-Guard or by blocking unknown source addresses at the router, and
   in so doing they would be expressing their intention.  This
   configuration would not cause any new problem: a host that could
   communicate would still be able to communicate, and a host that could
   not communicate would not become able to communicate.

   The one scenario where a communication problem can actually be
   expected is when there is a GUA prefix advertised by infrastructure
   but no ULA prefix, but there is a ULA destination to reach.  In this



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 54]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   case, the longest-matching-prefix algorithm could choose the SNAC-
   router-provided ULA prefix as a source address to reach the site-
   provided ULA destination, and in this case communication would fail.
   Only "Happy Eyeballs" [RFC8305] can correct this situation.

A.3.2.  Use on a managed network without IPv6

   In this scenario, there is no IPv6 service being intentionally
   advertised on a managed network.  Administrators of such networks may
   not be aware of the possibility of configuring RA-Guard.  In this
   situation, a SNAC router will connect and advertise services, which
   will be reachable just as they would be in a similar unmanaged
   network.  A SNAC router that conforms to this specification will not
   advertise an IPv6 default route on any interface.  Therefore, it
   should not cause operational problems, just as connecting an IPv4 NAT
   gateway in the same scenario would not cause operational problems.

Appendix B.  Router Advertisements on the Infrastructure Network

   This appendix is informative only.  Any values provided here are
   based on the normative requirements in this document, [RFC4861] and
   other referenced documents.

   An active SNAC router sends periodic unsolicited multicast Router
   Advertisements as well as unicast Router Advertisements on the
   adjacent infrastructure link (AIL).  These Router Advertisements are
   filled with the following values consistent with the message format
   given in Section 4.2 of [RFC4861]:

   *  Router Lifetime: A SNAC router never advertises itself as a
      default router on infrastructure.  Therefore, the router lifetime
      is always zero in a SNAC router's Router Advertisements sent on
      the AIL.

   *  For the 'M' and 'O' flag bits, Section 5.1.2.3 specifies how the
      values are set.  In case that no other router (excluding SNAC
      routers) on the AIL has set these flags, they are both set to
      zero.

   *  The 'SNAC router' flag [I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]: 1

   *  In the Cur Hop Limit field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the Reachable Time field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the Retrans Timer field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the options:



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 55]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      -  Source Link-Layer Address option: Including this option
         whenever possible is recommended.  The load balancing use case
         in Section 6.2.3 of [RFC4861] is out of scope for this document
         and is not generally expected to be applicable.  The benefit of
         including this option is that it eliminates the need to do
         Neighbor Discovery on the SNAC router's link-local address to
         get its link-layer address.

      -  MTU option: the SNAC router is not managing the link, and hence
         should not send this option.

      -  Prefix Information options: when there is no suitable prefix
         (See Section 5.1.1) on the adjacent infrastructure link, some
         SNAC router will need to send a PIO.  However, unless they are
         able to cooperate in choosing a PIO, only one SNAC router will
         send a PIO.  How this decision is made is described in
         Section 5.1.2.  When a SNAC router sends this option, the
         following settings apply:

         o  In the 'L' flag bit (on-link): 1

         o  In the 'A' flag bit (autonomous address configuration): 1

         o  In the Valid Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME, but see Section 5.1.2.5.

         o  In the Preferred Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME, but see Section 5.1.2.5.

      -  Route Information Option: an active SNAC router always provides
         a Route Information Option for each OSNR prefix that is valid
         on the stub network.  This provides a route from the
         infrastructure network to the stub network.  The following
         settings apply:

         o  Prefix Length: 64

         o  Route Preference: low

         o  Route Lifetime: the remaining valid lifetime of the OSNR
            prefix on the stub network, but no more than
            STUB_NETWORK_ROUTE_LIFETIME

         o  Prefix: the OSNR prefix advertised on the stub network

      -  Any other RA options: a SNAC router does not send any further
         RA options, because the SNAC router is not responsible for
         managing the infrastructure network.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 56]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   Per Section 5, all RA options for a SNAC router must fit in a single
   RA message.  SNAC routers do not send multiple RAs with different
   information other than to announce that some information that was
   previously advertised has changed.

Appendix C.  Router Advertisements on the stub network

   This appendix is informative only.  Any values provided here are
   based on the normative requirements in this document, [RFC4861] and
   other referenced documents.  This appendix is only applicable to stub
   network technologies that support sending of IPv6 ND Router
   Advertisement messages in the format defined by [RFC4861].  Note that
   this is typically not the case for 6LoWPAN-based stub network link-
   layer technologies.

   A SNAC router sends unsolicited periodic as well as solicited Router
   Advertisements on its stub network interface, filled with the
   following values consistent with the message format given in
   Section 4.2 of [RFC4861]:

   *  Router Lifetime: The SNAC router can be a default router on the
      stub network (see Section 5.4).  In this case, the value is the
      remaining lifetime of the default route that was detected on the
      AIL with a maximum of STUB_NETWORK_ROUTE_LIFETIME.  If it is not a
      default router, the value is zero.

   *  SNAC routers do not provide DHCPv6 service on the stub network.
      Therefore, the 'M' and 'O' flag bits must be zero.

   *  The 'SNAC router' flag [I-D.ietf-6man-snac-router-ra-flag]: 0.
      Note that this flag is only set by the SNAC router in RA messages
      sent on its AIL interface.

   *  In the Cur Hop Limit field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the Reachable Time field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the Retrans Timer field: 0 ("unspecified by this router")

   *  In the options, the SNAC router may send options as appropriate.

      -  Source Link-Layer Address option: Including this option
         whenever possible is recommended.  The load balancing use case
         in Section 6.2.3 of [RFC4861] is out of scope for this document
         and is not generally expected to be applicable.  The benefit of
         including this option is that it eliminates the need to do
         Neighbor Discovery on the SNAC router's link-local address in
         order to get its link-layer address.



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 57]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


      -  MTU option: the SNAC router is managing its stub network link,
         and hence may send this option.

      -  Prefix Information option: Some SNAC router will need to send a
         PIO with the OSNR prefix.  Normally, only one SNAC router on
         the same stub network will send a PIO.  How this decision is
         made is described in Section 5.2.  When a SNAC router sends
         this option, the following settings apply:

         o  In the 'L' flag bit (on-link): 1

         o  In the 'A' flag bit (autonomous address configuration): 1

         o  In the Valid Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME, but see Section 5.1.2.5.

         o  In the Preferred Lifetime field: normally
            STUB_PROVIDED_PREFIX_LIFETIME, but see Section 5.1.2.5.

      -  Route Information Option: when a SNAC router is not advertising
         a default route, it must include one or more RIO options in
         Router Advertisement messages on the stub network to provide
         reachability to infrastructure.  This is discussed in
         Section 5.4.  The following settings apply:

         o  Prefix Length: the length of the prefix covered by the
            route, not necessarily 64.

         o  Route Preference: low

         o  Route Lifetime: The lifetime of the on-link prefix on the
            AIL, or route lifetime of the route observed on the AIL, but
            no more than STUB_NETWORK_ROUTE_LIFETIME

         o  Prefix: the prefix that is known to be reachable on the
            infrastructure network

Appendix D.  Handling failure and change situations on a stub network

   How a SNAC router handles situations of device failure, network
   failure or other changes on its stub network is outside the scope of
   the normative specification for a SNAC router.  This handling depends
   on the specific stub network technology being used.  This informative
   appendix provides guidance about the expected behavior and properties
   of the stub network with respect to failure and change situations,
   such that the interoperability goals (Section 1.1) and the usability
   goals (Section 1.2) can be satisfied.




Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 58]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   A SNAC router that supports cooperation between multiple SNAC routers
   in the same stub network is expected to support the following basic
   failure and change situations by automatically adapting to the new
   situation:

   *  A new SNAC router is added to the stub network.

   *  A SNAC router is powered down, or removed from the stub network.

   *  An existing SNAC router is powered up again, after a short (e.g.
      reboot) or long period of time.

   *  A SNAC router fails and stops operating.

   *  Connectivity in the stub network changes due to e.g. changing
      radio conditions, moved devices, or plugged/unplugged cables.

   While the details of how a stub network technology supports these
   basic cases is out of scope of this document, some hints, suggestions
   and examples from current stub network technologies are discussed
   below.

   Some technologies used for stub networks, for example Thread or
   6LoWPAN wireless mesh networks, can produce partitioned networks,
   where what is notionally the same stub network winds up looking like
   two or more discrete links.  Such partitions can form and rejoin over
   time as a result of either changes in radio propagation or the
   addition of, or removal of, or mobility of, devices on the mesh.

   On stub networks that can partition, one way of detecting that a
   partition has occurred is to notice that the SNAC router that has
   advertised the on-link OSNR prefix for the stub network is no longer
   reachable via the stub network.  A SNAC router that notices such a
   loss of reachability can take action in order to satisfy the
   requirement in Section 5.2 that at least one SNAC router provides an
   OSNR prefix.  How this requirement is satisfied is specific to the
   stub network technology used.  For example, the SNAC router could
   autonomously decide to advertise its own OSNR prefix if it sees that
   no other SNAC router is advertising an OSNR prefix yet.  Or, it could
   perform a coordination protocol with the other SNAC routers that it
   can still reach, to determine which of the SNAC routers should
   provide the OSNR prefix next.









Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 59]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   An implication of this is that when such a partition forms, the same
   OSNR prefix cannot be advertised on both partitions, since this will
   result in ambiguous routing to/from the infrastructure network.  This
   problem is already addressed by the requirement that each SNAC router
   generate its own ULA site prefix (see Section 5.2.1), from which a
   unique ULA OSNR prefix is allocated.

   When partitions of this type occur, they may also heal at a later
   time.  When a stub network heals in a situation where two SNAC
   routers have both been advertising an OSNR prefix on their respective
   partitions, it will now appear that there are two OSNR prefixes on
   the same stub network.

   How the case of two or more OSNR prefixes on the same stub network is
   handled, is specific to the stub network technology.  Some
   technologies may easily handle multiple OSNR prefixes, while other
   more constrained network technologies may need to apply a maximum to
   the number of OSNR prefixes for resource/efficiency reasons.  See
   Section 5.2.2 for more discussion on such single-prefix and multiple-
   prefix constraints.  While that section has DHCPv6-specific
   requirements only, the general issue needs to be resolved by a stub
   network technology also for deployments in which DHCPv6-PD is not
   available or deployments with mixed DHCPv6/ULA based OSNR prefixes.

   As an example that can be used in a constrained stub network: a
   feasible strategy is for each SNAC router to perform a numeric
   comparison between the multiple OSNR prefixes and let the numerically
   lowest prefix/prefixes "win".  The prefixes that don't win are
   deprecated.  This has the benefit that non-ULA DHCPv6-PD delegated
   OSNR prefixes are selected in favor of the numerically higher ULA
   link prefixes, thus supporting the SNAC interoperability goal of IP
   connectivity to the Internet.

Authors' Addresses

   Ted Lemon
   Apple Inc.
   One Apple Park Way
   Cupertino, California 95014
   United States of America
   Email: mellon@fugue.com


   Jonathan Hui
   Google LLC
   1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
   Mountain View, California 94043
   United States of America



Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 60]

Internet-Draft           Automatic Stub Networks             August 2026


   Email: jonhui@google.com


   Esko Dijk
   IoTconsultancy.nl
   Utrecht
   Netherlands
   Email: esko.dijk@iotconsultancy.nl











































Lemon, et al.             Expires 3 March 2027                 [Page 61]
